174

CHAPTER 8

practical problems could mostly be overcome by compromise, often just splitting the inconvenience (OK, the tunnel is not ideally placed for me, but my
neighbors won’t have to do a ridiculous drive to get to their land). The discussions that touched on deeper values were especially interesting. In one situation, the choice between alternative trajectories actually meant that one farm
or another would be completely eliminated. The initial stalemate was broken
when one of the farmers said that the other family had been there for much
longer than his, so he chose to leave. After all the conflict and strife that had
accompanied the entire high-speed rail project, this magnanimous gesture
was made from a profound sense of humanity. … This is the moment to realize
that a badly run problem-solving process not only unnecessarily antagonizes
people but, by putting them on the defensive, forces them into a very narrow
behavior pattern. They can’t be their nice, normal, and understanding selves
anymore because they are thrust into a position where they are forced to fight
for their immediate interests. This distances them from an essential part of
their humanity—in this case, for the many years of the project planning stage.
We have a moral obligation to do better, to devise problem-solving methods
that allow people to be themselves.
The development of frame creation from an approach to a model and eventually a full-blown methodology is very much a work in progress. There is no
better way to conclude this book than by inviting you to join in this exciting
venture. There is already a community working in this area, moving swiftly to
evolve the basic ideas that have been explicated in this book (see appendix 3).
Through the case studies, we have seen that the basic frame creation approach
can lead to results. The frame creation workshops are quite magical in their
ability to fundamentally shift the way people think, in only a couple of hours.
New patterns of meaning, structures for reasoning, and paths to action appear
where there were none before. This a fascinating and fun process that makes
problems disappear into thin air, and allows bright futures to emerge. Many
more of these projects should be done to help us understand the full potential
and significance of frame creation in different application areas.
I hope that the models and case studies in this book have given an impression of the frame creation approach. But there is a limit to what words can
achieve. I invite you to become a frame innovator and bring these insights,
models, processes, methods, and tools into action in your own environment.
This is important, as we face huge challenges in the coming years. Individuals

