LESSONS FROM DESIGN

49

new scenarios. Normal abduction is the reasoning pattern behind conventional
problem-solving—using the tried and tested patterns of relationships to reach
a solution. And this should not be dismissed: often the patterns of relationships that have been developed over many years of problem-solving efforts are
more than adequate to deal with the problem situation at hand. But sometimes
this type of routine reasoning doesn’t lead to the desired value anymore, and
we will have to think about the problem again. That brings us to the second
type of productive reasoning, design abduction.
Design abduction—two unknowns lead to a process of creative exploration

???

+

???

leads to

OUTCOME

In design abduction, the starting point is that we only know something about
the nature of the outcome, the desired value we want to achieve. So the challenge is to figure out “what” new elements to create, while there is no known
or chosen “how,” a “pattern of relationships” that we can trust to lead to the
desired outcome. Thus we have to create or choose both a “how” and a “pattern
of relationships.” As these are quite dependent on one another, they should be
developed in parallel. This double creative step requires designers to devise
proposals for both the “what” and the “how,” and test them in conjunction.
An example can help to clarify the difference between the two types of
abduction: say that the outcome we want to achieve is an energy rush when
coming to work in the morning. In normal abduction, we would also already
know the “how,” say that this is to be achieved through coffee—and we might
even have a proposed method of brewing coffee (dripping, squeezing, using
steam) so we can start developing a “what,” engineering the machine to make
the coffee for us. In design abduction, on the other hand, we would only know
the goal (quick rush of energy before work) but not know how to achieve it.
Hence, if we go for coffee, we would still need to choose a brewing method,
create a design for a machine, and then judge whether this would do the trick

