CHALLENGES

19

limited, twisted rationality can lead to. But that book becomes really chilling
when the reader realizes that the logic is completely sealed within the “identity”
of the society, and everybody in it. There is no escape possible from this closed
totalitarian culture, and all deeds of resistance will ultimately be doomed. The
self-sealing mechanism is very serious, indeed …
Thus, there is no question that the syndromes we are dealing with here are
deeply engrained, because they serve important purposes in creating stability
and continuity. They cannot be “solved” or eliminated—but we will see later in
this book that they can be overcome when that is needed.
Frame creation is an opportunity to approach the problems we face in novel
ways, and avoid repeating the dysfunctional problem-solving practices of the
past. As a first example, in the next case study the complex and deeply engrained
problems of a social housing situation are approached in an original and very
effective manner, bypassing all conventional problem-solving strategies.

CASE 4
Stories to connect people:
On reframing housing issues

An early project that pioneered a completely different approach to the bricksand-mortar thinking that dominates the cultural DNA of social housing
authorities took place in the late 1990s in Amsterdam. It was sparked by the
pressing issues of a neighborhood that had seen a substantial influx of immigrants from Turkey and Morocco. These new communities introduced a different culture to the old area, now vibrant with “Eastern” shops and newly built
mosques. In their midst still lived an aging Dutch population (Dutch families
with children tended to move away from this area, to the suburbs) who were
feeling more and more lost within their familiar surroundings. They perceived
the neighborhood as going downhill, a feeling of unsafety that was exacerbated when some public spaces were vandalized. Everybody kept more or less
to themselves, and it was clear that the influx of new people did not contribute
to an inclusive social network. While there were no immediate problems, the
social structure was felt to be close to collapse (De Gruijter, van Waesberge, and
Boutellier 2010). From interviews, researchers learned that many of the recent
(and not-so-recent) arrivals saw their existence in this cold, wet country as
temporary—they intended to return to Turkey or Morocco when they were old.

