160

CHAPTER 8

we have found that frame creation projects are often curiously strong and solid.
They have an innate capacity to help unlock the analytical and creative capabilities of people as well as to harness the breadth of their life experience to
achieve new frames. Being involved in frame creation and achieving recognition for your contributions in such an open and creative process is incredibly
motivating and engenders a sense of personal growth and fulfillment. Often,
frame creation projects take on a personal significance to people that goes far
beyond their official scope. This is a classic win-win situation: organizations
that can allow themselves to move beyond narrow conceptions of rationality
and create practices that fully employ the abilities of all of their people will be
all the richer for it.
“FRUITFULNESS”
While “ripeness” is the term that designers use to talk about problem situations, “fruitfulness” is the term they use when discussing solution directions.
Like ripeness, this is a notion that needs some explanation. Fruitfulness is the
sense that a certain frame will not be a dead end, but will lead to a rich “solution space” with interesting and viable ideas. In studying expert designers, one
can observe them making split-second decisions on fruitfulness all the time;
they seem to have a special sense for this. Making these judgments requires a
broad experience in the field, of course; being able to look into the future and
prejudge situations and solution directions is almost the definition of expertise. The expert’s ability to make split-second judgments in these processes is
in marked contrast to less experienced participants, who will have to follow a
solution direction until they get stuck, backtrack, and start all over again if it
doesn’t work. Thus, they laboriously build up the capacity to judge fruitfulness
over the course of many projects. There are no shortcuts to achieving the magical ability to judge fruitfulness: at this point we reach the limit of what a method
like frame creation can do. Methods are merely explicit patterns of practice, in
this case based on the ways that real experts work. By making experts’ patterns
of practice more explicit, we seek to help nonexperts in a field to also reach a
good result. Going through a considered pattern of steps or phases can help
them avoid some pitfalls and can make a process more manageable—but this
handy sequence of steps can never replace true expertise. So there are a couple
of points in the frame creation methodology (around the high-level notions of
“ripeness” and “fruitfulness” and, as we will see, around the strategic choice of
the “right” themes) where experience and expertise really make a difference. In

