172

CHAPTER 8

2009) within a transdisciplinary process. A new type of network could result
of people working together in communities where themes, frames, and ideas
cross-pollinate and travel far and wide—driven not by the immediate necessity
of a problem or need, but by engaging one another around a theme or frame.
At the beginning of this book, I posed the question of how individuals and
organizations could deal with the open, complex, dynamic, and networked
problem situations that characterize our age (figure 1.1). Through the study
of advanced design practices and extensive experimentation, the frame creation approach was created and proposed as a possible answer. Interestingly,
in frame creation, the open, complex, dynamic, and networked nature of problem situations is embraced and used as the path to solving them (figures 4.1
and 5.1). The problem is opened up through the analysis of the wider problem
arena, and its complexity is increased by potentially involving a greater group
of possible stakeholders. The dynamics of the problem situation are taken
into account by the interactions that occur along the whole frame creation
process, in analysis as well as in the creative steps (figure 5.2). This results in
the agendas for transformation that support the resulting frames and solution
directions. The networked nature of problems is an integral part of this broad
approach, as it moves away from seeing only one “problem owner” and only
one driver of the solutions. The depth and connection of the common themes
and the shared understanding of the created frames produce a robust network
of individuals and organizations to realize the new solution. Frame creation
practices move quite freely and creatively within the complex problem arena
between the rationalities that have contributed to the existence of the problem.
Steering clear of these limiting rationalities (figure 7.2), and yet also avoiding
the chaos of a random process, the frame creation approach provides a middle
way toward the creation of a solution to the problem situation. Through the
renewed framing of the problem situation, the root cause of the original issue
is targeted. In a sense, this is more than problem-solving: it is the complete
resolution of the problem. The ideal frame should resolve and eliminate the
problem situation that gave rise to it, “and release the mind to do new things,”
to quote Wittgenstein. Interestingly, at the other end of the philosophical spectrum, the Indian philosopher Krishnamurti has said the same: “There is only
the problem, there is no answer; for in the understanding of the problem lies
its dissolution” (Krishnamurti 1995).
The power of this approach is beautifully exemplified in the following epilogue to the case study with which this book started in chapter 1, the impossible and fraught planning process for the high-speed train.

