THE ART OF FRAME INNOVATION

161

our own practice, these are the moments when we make sure high-level experts
are involved to guide the process along.
CHOOSING THE “RIGHT” THEMES
Choosing the “right” themes is a difficult step in the frame creation process, and
a highly strategic one: through the choice of themes and the selection of concepts “to think with,” one is generating frames that are pertinent to the themes.
The trick is that the themes chosen should not be too literal or too close to
the themes and frames that underlie current solutions. Also, when the several
themes chosen are all combined, they should still be centered around the core
and salient aspects of the original problem brief. Choosing themes one-sidedly
can pull the whole frame creation process off course by creating undue emphasis on one part of the problem arena. In the marathon example, the themes of
“recognition,” “appropriateness,” and “inclusiveness” can be seen as portraying
the entire problem arena on a deeper, fundamental level. In practice, it may
take a lot of creative thought and quite a number of iterations to select the
themes that are “right,” in that they are balanced as a set and together spark
the development of a truly valuable new approach to the problem situation.
These iterations are important and inevitable, and will have to be tolerated:
taking the steps to develop themes and, from there, to develop frames is crucial
in the frame creation approach; more than any other part of the process, this
determines the quality of the outcome. In a way, it should not surprise us that
these steps are hard. Fundamentally, frame creation is a design-based practice
that was developed from the working methods of expert designers. By making
their frame creation approaches explicit and accessible, we haven’t made them
any easier. But the strength of the frame creation model lies in the fact that
less experienced teams can also get really good results through the thoughtful application of the processes, principles, and practices outlined in this book.
FROM CONTEXT TO FRAMES
As we’ve seen, within the frame creation approach themes emerge from the
correspondence of deeper meaning and value among the players in the broad
problem field. The identification of such themes can be achieved through the
filtering processes that have been developed within the context of hermeneutic
phenomenology (see chapter 3). A reasonably quick and dirty way to advance
this process of emergence is illustrated in figure 8.2. One can start a matrix by
making a list of the core stakeholders (from the “context” step of the process)

