THE PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES OF FRAME CREATION

117

were many more frames and ideas built around other groups in the population—
like restoring the natural flow of the streams and marshes (which are now ugly
concrete storm drains) to make the area more attractive to outside visitors.
The strength of the frame creation approach in such a difficult area of interlocking problem patterns is that it undertakes a detailed exploration of the problem
situation (by really listening to the problems of the people involved), and then
takes a step back. The terms in which the issues are formulated are part of the
problem situation, so the next step must be to explicitly create an alternative.
In these serious cases, the solution doesn’t lie in a single intervention but in
the creation of a bigger process in which the themes work together. Transformation of complex situations requires this kind of subtle, concerted effort. In
this way we can also assure that, as in all frame creation projects, the human
side will lead to the development of the solutions—yes, in this case there are
obvious things to improve in the built environment, but those improvements
only make sense in the context of a deeper transformation process. All steps
in the learning cycle of figure 5.5 are necessary for results to be achieved, and
single projects that concentrate on only one or two of these steps are not going
to have a lasting effect.
For the third of these cases to exemplify the variety of frame creation projects, we return to the Young Designers foundation, introducing a project that
actually started from the investigation of a theme.

CASE 16
Loneliness:
On using frame creation for understanding societal issues

The YD/ project that was sparked by the crushing loneliness of the mentally
handicapped people in an urban environment (case 6 in this book) has led to
an interesting sequel, many years later. In this project, the theme of loneliness itself took center stage, as one of the contemporary problems that lead to
unhappiness and suffering by many—and a problem that government bodies,
health authorities, and NGOs are grappling with. The starting point for the YD/
project was that the use of the single word “loneliness” actually hides its many
meanings. And the word is problematic, as it is tendentious, associated with

