PIONEERS

33

a festival terrain)—the fact that it happens twice a week is neither here nor
there. To take this analogy further: how would one go about organizing a music
festival? A well-run music festival would provide many facilities that were not
available at all in the entertainment district, but that could easily be designed
there. For one thing, organizers of a music festival would make sure that people
could arrive easily but also be able to leave again when they wanted. In this
entertainment quarter, the peak time of young people coming into the area
is about 1 a.m., but the last train leaves at 1:20 a.m. Getting a taxi later in the
night takes about two hours, if the driver wants to pick up people there at all
(taxis tend to avoid this neighborhood). So once people are in the entertainment quarter, they are basically crammed into a single road until the trains
start running again at six in the morning. That is ultimately very boring and
frustrating. Apart from the obvious improvement of providing more trains, the
designers also proposed as a fallback position a system of temporary signage
on the pavement, to help partygoers reach a different train station (a twentyminute walking distance) that has buses running throughout the night.
Returning to the frame of a music festival, festival organizers would create
chill-out spaces and offer continuous attractions to make sure that people will
move around, so their experience does not completely depend on what takes
place on a single large stage. As it happens, this entertainment district has a
few big clubs that are the main attractions, but there is very little else to do. As
a result, young people who have visited a club and go back out on the street
might find that the queue for the next one is several hours long. If they decide
not to join the queue, they are out in the street with nothing to do. The designers proposed that this problematic pattern of behavior can be minimized by
providing a texting service or a smartphone app, so that people can find out
how long the wait for the next club is before leaving the first one. In addition,
some of the laneways around the central street could be prepared as rest areas,
with water fountains and a relaxed “lounge” atmosphere away from the crowds.
Another obvious thing one would provide for a music festival is enough public
toilets. This particular entertainment quarter has only three, one of which is
underused because it is located in a rather forbidding-looking police station.
Consequently, there is a real problem with street urination (not surprising, if
you calculate the amount of beer being drunk on a typical night). Of course, the
designers proposed introducing a system of mobile toilet blocks.
Over the years, the clubs had hired more and more security personnel and
bouncers as part of the conventional approach to solving the alcohol-related

