12

CHAPTER 1

These open, complex, dynamic, and networked problems just do not gel
well with the assumptions behind our conventional problem-solving methods,
because most of our conventional strategies were conceived to work in a reasonably isolated, static, and hierarchically ordered “miniworld.” When problems appeared, we could isolate them in a separate problem arena, decompose
the problem into relative simple subproblems and analyze these, create subsolutions, and then build those subsolutions together into an overall solution
that satisfied all concerned. If this strategy of divide-and-solve failed, we could
use the alternative strategy of exercising authority to “simplify” the problem
area by overruling some parties, and force a solution that satisfied the most
powerful player.
But neither of these strategies works for today’s problems. We are living
in a state of hyperconnectivity. Each of us has become newly connected to
innumerable other people. By networking our society, we have inadvertently
networked our problems, too—we have made them more open, complex, and
dynamic! The enclosed miniworlds of our societies, economies, and cultures
have been replaced by a tangle of relationships within complex and overlapping networks, where problems cannot be simplified by being split up (the
network of relationships is too strong) and power doesn’t rest in one place anymore (so overrule-and-conquer is out of the question). Moreover, problems are
so intimately related to each other (and there are so many interdependencies)
that they become impossible to isolate (Stacey, Griffin, and Shaw 2006; Lawson
2001). Solving problems nowadays is like trying to undo the Gordian knot in
Greek mythology: whatever string you try to pull to unravel the knot, you end
up in more of a jumble.
From the three case histories above, we can also learn that these peculiar
open, complex, dynamic, and networked problems cannot be pinned down very
easily—if at all. They are more like “problem situations” in which the issues keep
shifting around, and any premature attempt to draft a problem definition can
lead to suboptimal or even counterproductive solutions. Yet in conventional
problem-solving, the “definition of the problem” is always the first step, and it
is the solid ground on which the problem-solving practices of organizations are
built. Often, organizations that do not realize the open, complex, dynamic, and
networked nature of the world around them get tricked into using their established routines because the problem, as they define it for themselves, mostly
looks the same as earlier problems. And indeed, the core problems themselves
may not have changed much over time (after all, we have planned train lines

