INSPIRATION

191

subject of objective study through the application of reason, for the attainment
of understanding and truth. This is a mechanistic view of the world and human
existence. The overwhelming emphasis on control, combined with a mechanistic worldview, easily leads to an exploitative relationship to the natural world
and indeed to fellow humans.
To illustrate the way these different cultural codes work out in practice, we
could take the example of the medical profession: issues of sickness and death
are a universal human concern, and all cultures have developed a way to deal
with them. Not only do the different codes have widely different way of dealing
with sickness, they also have widely different concepts of what a doctor is. The
role and methods of working of the shamans, Indian medicine, Chinese medicine, and Western medical practice could hardly be more different.
The openness of the frame creation approach extends beyond the confines
of Western thought—in a way, frame creation invites us to use all thinking patterns that we can humanly muster to create solutions to bafflingly complex
problem situations. And the different “cultural codes” have much to offer, both
in their methods and in their ability to give words to phenomena that have
been left without description in the dominant cultural code, which is a combination of the revelation religions and Western scientific thought.
The Japanese cultural code, with its attention to balance, has given us both
the fine sensitivity of the Japanese aesthetic (Tanizaki 1977) and the coolblooded balance of Musashi’s book on strategy written in 1645 (Musashi 1974).
For the practice of frame creation, the Japanese form of poetry called renku is
particularly relevant, as it introduces a very special kind of reframing. In renku,
overlapping verses of poetry are written by a group of poets taking turns. The
poet whose turn it is takes the last two or three lines of the verse before and
adds three (or two, respectively) in such a way that the meaning of the original
lines is reframed. The process is led by the renku master, who imposes strict
rules on the nature of the reframe: e.g., that the “rhythm” or “energy” should be
constant while reversing the subject, or that a formal aspect should be played
on while expanding the scope of the imagery. Matsuo Bashō (1644–1694) is
considered to be the greatest renku master that ever lived (Ueda 1982). The
ancient art of renku thus gives us a subtle vocabulary for framing and reframing, the playful changing of points of view that is considered to be a core design
ability. This approach is significant because in the West, framing and reframing are often treated as “creative”—as just “random” processes—effectively
dismissing these impressive leaps of thought as beyond reason and therefore

