80

CHAPTER 4

CASE STUDIES

In the frame creation process, the oscillation between analysis and creation that
is central to creative design practice is intimately combined with a movement
of zooming in and out (from detail to abstraction and back again) and a shift
in focus from an understanding of the core problem situation to widening the
context, then to refocusing on the problem within a broadened field. Central to
these movements is the fifth step, where a kind of design-phenomenological
analysis leads to the basic themes from which new frames can be created. The
first four steps lay the groundwork, and the last four steps explore the implications of the frames and the possible actions that they lead to. This description
of the model above is quite abstract—let’s see how this practice works in real
life by applying it to three widely different problem situations.

CASE 11
The Sydney Opera House podium:
On inhabiting public space

The Designing Out Crime center in Sydney was asked to devise a new solution
to prevent people from climbing up the “sails” (the white shells) of the Sydney
Opera House. The initial two-hour frame creation session included a content
specialist and eighteen young architects and designers from Sydney.
1

ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE PROBLEM SITUATION

The problem situation as presented to the Designing Out Crime center focused
on the issue of people trespassing. Usually these trespassers would be protesters who climb the “sails” of the Sydney Opera House to unroll a banner or, in
one case, paint a slogan on the sails of the building. These events have happened repeatedly over the years, and they always attract a lot of media attention. Thus, the Sydney Opera House, as an iconic building (a UNESCO world
heritage site) and a highly symbolic locus for the city of Sydney, is politically
vulnerable. Protesters have exploited key vulnerable locations at the bottom of
the sails (which shall not be disclosed in this case study, for obvious reasons).
However, it can be said that to climb the Opera House sails, a protester needs
to access the podium on which the sails sit (figure 4.2).

