184

APPENDIX 2

the system’s goals and its outer environment, with only minimal assumptions
about the “inner environment” (Simon 1969, 53).
In a later paper, Simon (1973) addressed some of the difficulties that might
arise in applying the rational problem-solving approach to design by defining
design problems as “ill-structured problems.” Ill-structured problems should
be tackled in an “immediate problem space”—a part of the total problem space
which is deemed too large, ill-structured, and ill-defined to be described. The
immediate problem space is addressed and put together by an (unspecified)
“noticing and evoking mechanism.” The goal of a design process is to arrive at a
solution that is “good enough”: “we satisfice by looking for alternatives in such
a way that we can generally find an acceptable one after only moderate search”
(Simon 1973). In The Sciences of the Artificial (1969), Simon maintains that
design problems are hierarchically organized, and the way to design a complex
structure is to discover viable ways of decomposing it into subproblems, solving these, and combining them to arrive at a new overall solution. In problemsolving theory, a “good” (most efficient) reasoning process is defined as the one
that involves the shortest search path through the problem space.
A radically different paradigm was proposed fifteen years later by Donald
Schön (1983), who describes design as an activity involving “reflective practice.”
This pragmatist, constructionist theory is specifically made to address some of
the shortcomings Schön perceived in the rational problem-solving approach
to professional practice. Schön believes that the design component of the professions is underestimated, and that the nature of human design activities is
misunderstood. Schön stresses the uniqueness of every problem situation, and
identifies the core skill of designers as their ability to determine how every
single problem should be approached. Schön calls this the essence, or “the artistry,” of design practice, and finds it unacceptable that it cannot be described
in the rational problem-solving framework.
To Schön, one of the basic problems for designers is to determine how to
approach each single unique task through “a kind of knowing [that] is inherent in intelligent action” (Schön 1983, 50). Although he recognizes that this
implicit “knowing-in-action” is difficult to describe and convey to students,
he argues that what can be taught and considered is the explicit reflection
that guides the development of one’s knowing-in-action habits. This he calls
“reflection-in-action.” In a “reflective conversation with the situation,” designers work by naming the relevant factors in the situation, framing a problem,
making moves toward a solution, and evaluating those moves. The frames are

