LESSONS FROM DESIGN

51

WHAT MAKES DESIGN HARD? PROBLEMS AND PARADOXES
Many issues that we encounter in our daily lives and professional practices
never reach the status of “a problem.” If the issue is quite simple and we have
an obvious scenario in our repertoire to deal with it, we just get on with it and
act. A “problem” occurs only when we either do not know how to progress or
our chosen way of working gets us stuck. Then we have to stop and think, devise
and critically consider options, perhaps be strategic and create multistep plans,
do scenario planning, etc. Problems occur when something blocks our normal
flow of how we deal with the issues in life. This “something,” the counterforce,
is bound to have its own background and rationale—at the core of really “hard”
problems is a paradox. The word “paradox” is used here rather loosely, in the
sense of a complex statement that consists of two or more conflicting statements (Dorst 2006). All the statements that make up the paradox are (possibly)
true or valid in their own right, but they cannot be combined for logical or
pragmatic reasons. There are three ways forward. The first option is to choose
one side of the paradox and let it take precedence over the other. There is also
the option of compromise, where negotiation might lead to a decision that sits
near the halfway point between opposing needs and views. The third way forward in these tough paradoxical situations, where there is a real clash of views,
standpoints, or requirements, is to redefine the problem situation. Designers
do this very well. In her book Ethics in Engineering Practice and Research, Caroline Whitbeck (1998) remarks, “The initial assumption (within moral philosophy) that a conflict is irresolvable is misguided, because it defeats any attempt
to do what design engineers often do so well, namely, to satisfy potentially
conflicting considerations simultaneously” (56).
This observation is borne out by the case studies in chapter 2—somehow,
the designers and young artists managed to wriggle out of confounding problem situations that had, in some cases, already existed for a very long time, and
created a position from which the problem situation could be steered toward a
solution. This accomplishment is in stark contrast to a conventional problemsolving approach, where the problematic situation cannot be redefined because
the way the solution must work (the “how,” its “pattern of relationships”) is
already fixed. This is the serious limitation of the normal abduction used in
conventional problem-solving. The conventional problem solver only has the
options of giving one side of the paradox precedence over the other or creating
a compromise between the two positions.
The challenge of dealing creatively with paradoxes is one of the aspects
that makes design so fascinating and captivating. Unresolved paradoxes can

