34

CHAPTER 2

crime and antisocial behavior issues. The designers proposed a system of
very visible young “guides” in bright T-shirts, who help people find their way
through the area and who are also approachable when help is needed. This
proposal makes perfect sense: research has shown that people do not approach
officials for help unless these officials are approachable for other, low-threshold questions too. These bright and cheery Info people create a more caring
social environment, a stark contrast to the huge private-security men in black
who lurk, Death Eater–like, in every corner. In fact, the introduction of these
security personnel has, paradoxically, been a major contribution to the grim
atmosphere of the area.

CASE 9
Save us from the bollards:
On safety in a public space

Circular Quay, in the middle of Sydney, is a truly spectacular site. The beautiful
views of the harbor are framed by the iconic Harbour Bridge on one side, and
the Sydney Opera House at the other side. It is a picture-perfect destination
for millions of visitors every year. Unfortunately, these very qualities also make
Circular Quay a high-profile site, and as such an attractive target for a possible terrorist attack. The DOC designers were asked to come up with proposals
for averting such an attack, or minimizing the damage if an attack occurred.
Initial investigations showed that it would be important to limit car access to
certain areas of the site. The police counterterrorism experts, very much aware
of this need, were on the verge of proposing the placement of dozens of massive bollards to achieve this end. But they also realized that bollards would all
but ruin the site and make life very difficult for locals and visitors alike. To get
beyond the yes-or-no-bollards discussion, the DOC designers knew the problem needed to be widened to include many more complex issues and a whole
network of stakeholders. And there was no shortage of problems with the area
that could be addressed in concert with the counterterrorism question. Apart
from the uniquely wonderful setting, the public spaces around Circular Quay
were actually not that great—just some large open squares with nothing much
to do. The DOC designers seized the opportunity, and proposed a complete

