52

CHAPTER 3

capture our attention to the extent that we cannot help thinking how to resolve
them. Paradoxical problem situations inspire the creative imagination, much
like the famous koans that are used in Japanese Zen training to provoke people
to defy rationality and free their minds. While koans are beautiful and poetic,
the challenge to come up with a sensible response can also be intolerable (Van
de Wetering 1999). The mind-boggling nature of paradoxes and the difficulties
they cause for our everyday thinking skills also make paradoxes a fascinating
intellectual toy for linguists, logicians, and mathematicians (Hofstadter 1979).
But that is not the way we want to talk about paradoxes in this book. Here we
deal with real-world paradoxes that are caused by conflicting values and needs
on the problem side, or by the incommensurability of design outcomes on the
solution side.
In real-world situations, paradoxes are particularly formidable when the
needs, interests, and “object worlds” (Bucciarelli 1994) are rationalized by different stakeholders. These perceived rationalities become a problem when a
personal or institutional worldview is seen as the only one possible, making life
hard for the problem solver, who is caught in the middle. Yet as Whitbeck has
observed, designers can somehow deal with these knotty problems. In the Young
Designers project on Integrated Living (case 5), the care organizations unquestioningly believed that part of their responsibility was to protect the mentally
handicapped people in their charge. And they rationalized this “responsibility
to protect” to include “complete control over their environment”—even if this
meant isolating the mentally handicapped in their city residences. This result
is, of course, completely at odds with the government objective of integrating these mentally handicapped into society. By being isolated, the mentally
handicapped are further removed from companionship than ever (in the old
days, they would at least have had each other to talk to) and are very far from
being able to lead “normal” and “rich” lives in society. The paradox is complete.
But one can see where some assumptions of the care organizations could be
questioned, “cracked open,” and investigated. Does “care” really mean “protect,” and does “protection” really mean “control”? The government side of the
paradox also needs to be unlocked: What are the assumptions that informed
the ministry’s thinking, in particular the presumed need to integrate mentally
handicapped people in society? Are these assumptions valid? And what are the
ministry’s preconceptions about the role the care organizations would be playing in the new situation? Revealing the core paradoxes provides designers with
an entry point for examining these assumptions.

