LESSONS FROM DESIGN

43

they approach problems in a very strategic, deliberate, and thoughtful way.
This approach involves a lot of hard work, where inspirational ideas are helpful
but never yield a complete shortcut to a quality solution. Yet the myth of the
wonderful, magical, “divine spark” idea that suddenly occurs to the brilliant
mind of the incredibly gifted has been quite irresistible to designers, and many
of them when interviewed will readily reinforce this image. Unfortunately, it is
too good to be true.
Design is not irrational
There is nothing “soft” or vague about designing. Despite a deceptive playfulness in the conceptual phase of a design project, design ultimately needs
to be rigorous in its approach if it is to deliver results for the real world. An
essential part of the design process is making educated guesses when proposing solutions; yet these guesses will be tested later on in the project, if not by
the designer then by the confrontation of the design with reality itself. The
best designers are all very strong analytical thinkers with an original and playful bent of mind. Exercising judgment based on a clear analysis is an integral
part of the design disposition (Lawson 1994). People sometimes see design as
irrational because designing is not a completely objectifiable, closed form of
rationality: design is inherently open-ended, as there is always more than one
solution to a design problem. Design is not about creating “solutions” in the
same sense that we create solutions to mathematical equations, as absolute
truths in an abstract world. Designers create proposed solutions that can be
judged on a sliding scale of better or worse relative to the needs of stakeholders.
To ensure the relevance of their proposals, designers have developed elaborate
phase models and work processes to deal with the inherent ambiguity in their
practices, building in checks and balances wherever they can. To quote Nigel
Cross, paraphrasing Hamlet: “Yes, they are quite mad—but there is method to
their madness” (Cross 1996).
Design is not mysterious
We actually know a lot about design: the activities it consists of, the sequence
in which these activities often take place, the abilities needed to be a good
designer (Cross 1990, 2004), and the path of development of these abilities
(Lawson and Dorst 2009). Systematic design research has been around since
the early 1960s, and there is a flourishing design research community that has
amassed a wealth of knowledge. There is much more to be discovered, and the
design professions themselves are presenting a moving target for research by
continuously reinventing themselves (Dorst 2008, 2013b). Yet there is now a

