CHALLENGES

5

planning office’s route was chosen, with the addition of a major tunnel to minimize the impact on a sensitive environmental area on the route. The decision
was reached by some old-fashioned political power plays, and the outcome was
only vaguely related to reality. The politicians were locked in groupthink, and
did not realize that this compromise was both unfortunate in its impact and
spectacularly expensive compared to both original plans (Priemus 2009).
Although this is an example of public problem-solving at its very worst, it
is by no means an exceptional story. This type of decision-making happens
everywhere, all the time—just look at the news … This example had an interesting sequel: once the bulldozers were rolling through the landscape and the
concrete was being poured, Parliament in its wisdom passed a motion to investigate and evaluate the decision process of the high-speed train project, as it
was deemed to be clearly flawed. Resorting to political arm-twisting around
such an important issue which touched the lives of so many people is highly
regrettable. The parliamentary inquiry filed its report a year later, with its main
recommendation being that more research should have been done on the various plans under consideration. Yet if we retrace the history of the project, we
can only conclude that more research would not have helped at all. One can
only surmise that this recommendation was caused by the foolhardy belief that
rationality would then prevail. But that is not the issue: conventional problemsolving had reached the end of its tether, which is why the planning process
had ground to a halt. The parliamentary inquiry’s recommendation for more
research demonstrates their complete inability to even imagine a different
kind of problem-solving practice. We will get back to this case study at the end
of this book (in chapter 8), and will demonstrate that there is a viable way to
approach this problem. The journey to get there starts with the realization that
this problem is actually not about the train.

CASE 2
The dematerialization of products:
On navigating the postindustrial economy

We live in an age in which the industrial society, based on manufacturing
physical goods and selling them to consumers, is giving way to a society in
which information and services are much more important. This transformation

