166

CHAPTER 8

CATALYSTS AND CONDUCTORS
In the last chapters, the frame creation approach was presented through a process model and through explicating the principles and logic of frame creation.
Together, these make up the core model for a frame creation workshop session.
To do a frame creation project, this sessions needs to be embedded in a broader
project—it is just one step in a sequence of activities that together make up a
comprehensive frame innovation process. In the practice of the Designing Out
Crime center, frame creation projects are developed through seven stages (see
figure 8.4).
The epicenter of these projects is the frame creation workshop, in which
designers and stakeholders go through the nine-step process model that was
introduced in chapter 4. The first two stages can be seen as preparation that
leads up to the workshop, followed by the latter four stages in which the results
of the workshop are explored, developed, critically appraised, and prepared for
implementation by the partner organizations. To achieve quality in the frame
creation project, we need to achieve good results in all of these seven phases.
The stated aim of a catalyst organization like DOC or YD/ is to become
(largely) expendable by developing frame innovation capacity in its partner
organizations. This is a complex task, as the different steps in frame creation
involve quite different practices that are each built upon specific abilities and
skills, behind which sits a particular creative “mentality.” All the different
activities need to be strung together in a coherent process for the thing to work.
The catalyst organizations that we have looked at in this book are both doing
this in their own way, and they are also themselves changing over time: the
Young Designers foundation has turned from being project-focused (see cases
5 and 6) toward creating environments for transdisciplinary exchange (case 7),
and then toward taking a theme-based approach (case 16). The Designing Out
Crime center is in a completely different position, as it is based in academia (at
the University of Technology, Sydney, and at Eindhoven University of Technology). This position is reflected in its working processes. Within the DOC project
model (see figure 8.4), the core staff and postgraduate students concentrate on
the earlier phases of the frame creation process (up to and including the proposing of new frames), while undergraduate students explore these new futures
in many different directions. Experience has shown that if the framing has been
done well, all the solutions that the undergraduate students generate will be
interesting and useful. The center’s staff and professional associates then take
these ideas to a professional level for the handover to partner organizations.

