THE OPEN, COMPLEX, DYNAMIC, AND NETWORKED ORGANIZATION

129

the city council felt inspired by the realization that it is possible to change the
dynamics of the city at night in a positive way—and not just in Kings Cross.
They set up an extensive study of nightlife throughout the council area, which
resulted in very detailed maps of who is where at what time at night (by various
methods, such as counting pedestrians). Advice was sought from other cities
about their strategies for creating a lively and vibrant nighttime economy. After
a lengthy ideation and consultation process, various frames were created and
almost 200 concrete measures proposed. One of the key frames was triggered
by the realization that presently, only 6 percent of the people out on the streets
of the central business district at 11 p.m. are over 40 years old. Office workers were leaving the city district after working hours, when the area was taken
over by youth on a massive scale—resulting in problems with public order and
alcohol-related incidents. Part of the strategy now is to keep a much more varied population in the city at night. Proposed measures include the extension of
shop closing hours (making it possible to shop after work) and restaurant closing hours (to get a good meal afterward), the introduction of high-quality food
carts (in particular for concert and theater goers), and stimulating employers
to allow flexible work hours.
In this example, the frame creation project has been scaled up to extend its
influence on the structures and processes of the organization. Now we will
examine a case study where the need to create an organization that can establish its own frames is confronted head-on, without earlier frame creation projects to build from.

CASE 18
Reframing a design school:
Educating for a changing profession

The starting point for the transformation process at this design school was not
a specific issue or emergency: the school is well respected in the field and provides a thorough and solid grounding in design to its students. The spark that
kindled change was the worldwide movement of design into academia, which
has led to intense soul-searching about the meaning and content of “design at

