THE FRAME CREATION MODEL

85

Example 3:
If the problem situation of the Opera House podium is approached as if it is
a problem of creating a sense of place, then the podium should be …
To convey a sense of place, of giving meaning to having arrived and being
there, one could use storytelling to provide more depth to what the visitor sees.
Accessing the rich history of this spot and the surrounding city and country
could help. But then, a sense of arrival is also deeply personal—reflection and
expression are both part of place-making. Perhaps there could be a way for
people to leave a digital trace of their arrival, similar to carving initials in a tree.
7

FUTURES

By taking these frames as a starting point, and combining them where possible,
one could envisage the mid-podium area as a twenty-four-hour curated space
with diverse uses during the morning (perhaps yoga?), daytime (a sense of
place created through a soundscape, storytelling, and/or providing background
information), and late afternoon/evening (pop-up events, short concerts) to
late evening (more meditative events, such as light art, or moonlight/star-gazing), combined with longer-term events like sculpture exhibitions, soundscapes
based on the concerts inside the Opera House, interactive installations, and
projections. Similar projections on the floor inside (in the foyer) and outside
(on the podium) could be used to blur the boundary between inside and outside,
visually creating the sense of lightness the architect envisaged in the original
drawings (see figure 4.3). Thus the podium could be a fluid landscape, which
locals return to all the time to drink in the new experiences. Alternatively (or
additionally), one could guide the interaction of visitors by creating an elevated walkway that opens up interesting new vistas between the sails (similar
to a treetop walk) while gently preventing people from touching the building
and doing harm. In another scenario, sensors could be placed under the granite
slabs that make up the floor of the podium, as part of the basic infrastructure to
support all these different events. These sensors would be invisible and would
not interfere with the heritage status of the building (figure 4.3).
To come back to the initial problem of the protesters: the around-the-clock
use of the podium space would make it much harder for people to climb up
without attracting attention, and some simple measures could be taken to slow
down any attempted ascent so that security staff could arrive in time to prevent
it. These measures only need to be in place in the early hours of the morning

