112

CHAPTER 5

to collaborate closely in the delivery of their projects (in a “creative precinct”),
whereas creatives with an international outlook have much wider-ranging needs.
3–4

THE CONTEXT AND FIELD

None of the possible stakeholders have been involved in prior solutions, so we
move directly from considering these forces to the exploration of the broad
field of players. For questions around teleworking, players include the management culture and the governance structure of major corporations in the city.
We may also be dealing with regional centers that lie beyond the Blue Mountains. The strong agricultural sector in the area could be a major player that
might profit from the creation of a new venue for information exchange, as it
seeks to become more sophisticated and technology-savvy in the face of international competition. The statewide and national infrastructure parties (rail,
road) need to be taken into account, as well as local government and local community initiatives—they could profit from the establishment of Smart Work
Hubs. Existing major employers like the hospital and other specialist medical services could extend their activities. The finance industry could play an
interesting role, as it is currently a leading proponent of teleworking, or working from home. And the needs of current and future inhabitants of the region
would be the foundation for any new development.
5

THEMES

Three initial themes emerged from the workshop: (1) the sense of community
as it plays out in a complex pattern across different scales; (2) the need for
economic development that extends beyond the local level, and the challenge
to support the collaboration and learning that will help achieve this ambition;
and (3) the sense of work/life balance that comes from the community’s location on the river, at the edge of the Blue Mountains National Park.
6

FRAMES

Because this was an initial scoping workshop in a very broad problem arena,
the frame creation session led to a development process rather than the creation of specific frames. The themes provide the structure for such a process.
The idea was to set the development process in motion by attracting a community of possible Smart Work Hub users to the area, support their learning
through some prototype infrastructure (e.g., curated events), monitor the new

