PREFACE

We are living in unusual times. Every day we are challenged to navigate an
increasingly complex and dynamic world. This is true not only for us as individuals, in our private and professional lives, but also for the organizations we
create and are part of. Public organizations and companies alike are learning
the hard way that the problems before us now cannot be resolved in the way
we approached problems in the past. But if the old ways do not work anymore,
what do we do now? How can we create progress and deal with the new challenges that the world is putting before us?
As an answer to this question, this book introduces a fascinating new practice for creating original approaches to really hard problems. Frame creation
is a deep and thoughtful approach for achieving radical innovation that was
originally developed in the practices of expert designers. These expert designers have always been known for “solving the unsolvable,” creating new solutions where others see none, and for finding new opportunities where others
see only problems. But what, then, is their secret? They have a special approach
to problems, called “frame creation.” In this book, the frame creation approach
is introduced, investigated, and then modeled so that it can be used by professionals in other fields, beyond the designing disciplines.
The book is organized as follows: first, we will need to explore the nature of
today’s problems, and understand what makes these problems so hard to solve
(chapter 1). Learning from the practices of pioneering organizations (chapter
2) and more than fifty years of design research (chapter 3), the book builds
up to a nine-step model of the frame creation process (chapter 4). The principles and practices behind these steps are clarified (chapter 5), and then the
focus swerves to implementation of the frame creation approach, as tools and
methods for frame innovators are formulated (chapters 6, 7, and 8). Rather than
constituting a straight how-to manual for frame innovation, these tools and

