THE PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES OF FRAME CREATION

103

tend to reduce the scope of the problems we face by introducing assumptions
and framing them in a simple manner. Within frame creation, such assumptions that normally make life so easy are questioned, and the problem solver is
invited to embrace the complexity of the situation. A major misunderstanding
about the frame creation approach is that it contains some magic formula that
makes problems easier to solve. On the contrary: one of its major features is
that it avoids simplification. It only helps the proponent to deal with complexity by providing a distinction between diverse layers of context, which limits
the number of elements and relationships that need to be kept in mind at any
one time. But the frame creation approach initially makes problem situations
much more complex, before we can allow ourselves to converge on a solution.
Take for instance the Sydney Opera House case in the last chapter (case 11). In
the course of the frame creation process, the Opera House organization was
challenged to move away from seeing the issue as a security problem (difficult,
but limited in scope) to engage with other parties in the city and cooperate to
transform the role of the Opera House podium within the life of the city. In a
sense, their problem has not been reduced—it has grown immensely. This principle of problem expansion, which is part of the frame creation process, could
make the members of the “problem owner” organization acutely uncomfortable. But taking on this increased complexity is a crucial step toward creating
new frames and solutions. If the scope of attention cannot be widened to a rich
and complex field, no new frames can be created.
4

ZOOM OUT, EXPAND, AND CONCENTRATE

At the core of the frame creation process is a complex movement of zooming out and zooming in: first, widening the scope from a consideration of the
problem itself and setting it in its immediate context, the problem owner. And
then proceeding to the wider context, considering the other players that have
been involved in the problem situation before. This first zooming-out step
explores the players and the actions they have taken in and around the problem situation (and tries to understand which actions they might be prepared
to take in the future). Beyond that, we expand our horizon to the broader field.
This expansion toward the wider field is a rather special phase because we are
jumping from the study of the behavior patterns of stakeholders into the realm
of speculative thought, reflecting on what parties might be involved in the
future and building up an image of how these parties understand their reality.
This jump into the world of speculative thought then allows us to ponder the

