6

CHAPTER 1

necessitates a huge shift for many organizations that have grown up and
thrived in the industrial age—they are used to dealing with change in terms
of advances in technology and shifts in market preference, but nothing has
prepared them for the fundamental challenges that confront them now. As an
example, let’s look at Bang and Olufsen, a world-renowned Danish company
that produces high-end audio equipment. Only a few years ago, the future of
this company looked very bright. The company had been well known for over
thirty years as the producer of an iconic range of very austere, modernist audio
equipment. The identity of the company was strongly associated with these
high-quality “design classics” (Dickson 2006). However, to hold this enviable
market position, the company could never rest on its laurels: continuous innovation was needed to stay at the forefront of developments in audio technology,
and to cleverly incorporate these cutting-edge technologies into new products
that would harmonize with the company’s signature modernist aesthetic. The
company mastered this extremely subtle design game successfully. But the
absolute test of Bang and Olufsen’s problem-solving ability came when the
profitable high end of the consumer market quite suddenly abandoned the traditional concept of a “sound system” as a product that is placed in a living room.
These high-end consumers started buying audio systems that are built into the
structure of the house itself (domotica, or “home automation”) and controlled
by a remote—thus hiding the source of all that music from view. The disappearance of the sound system as an identifiable product was, of course, a huge
problem for a company that prides itself on the production of beautiful objects.
As a response, Bang and Olufsen set out to develop a new way of expressing the
core qualities of its material products in a nonmaterial way. It experimented
with the creation of interface devices and interface scenarios that would hold
the same subtle qualities as their classic products. But as they were performing this pioneering R&D work, another change hit the market. The ubiquitous presence of mobile technology and the Internet paved the way for the
integration of music players into computers, tablets, and smartphones. Music
became something that was downloaded or bought online, shared socially, and
consumed casually on mobile devices. This reframing of the meaning of music
in people’s lives meant that audio quality became less of a concern to most
users, aside from a small select group of connoisseurs. Bang and Olufsen found
that it needed to shift its value proposition again, and found that its sophisticated skills, knowledge, and practices were exquisitely honed to a world that
had changed beyond recognition (see also the Bang and Olufsen case study in

