THE FRAME CREATION MODEL

89

Because the fitting rooms are good hiding places, they become the location for theft.
Because the fitting rooms are a location for theft, measures are taken that
reduce the comfort of customers.
Because measures are taken that reduce the comfort of the fitting rooms,
they fail to provide a good shopping experience.
3

THE CONTEXT

The immediate professional stakeholders include the police, store designers,
and the security firms that are tasked with reducing this type of crime. The big
unheard party in the mix is, of course, the bona fide customer, who sees his
or her fitting room experience being made miserable by cramped little gray
cubicles where you can hardly move (let alone change clothes)—with nowhere
to put your own clothes and bag (sometimes not even a hook to hang them on),
and partitions that start rather high (to improve surveillance) and thus expose
your own bag as you put it on the floor. The fitting room has become a generally
unpleasant and grim environment.
4

THE FIELD

Clothing is a key expression of our identity, and as such it is a deeply social
phenomenon. The greater field in which value is being created thus includes
friends and family, as well as the broader social groups in society that potential
customers belong to. The field also includes retail trends, as the retail market is going through major disruption to its business models at the end of the
industrial economy (as discussed in case study 3). Retail is under pressure from
online sales and urgently needs to find new ways of being attractive to customers. The initial kneejerk reaction of some store personnel is to chase away
customers who they think are only coming to have a look at their products, but
will probably buy online—needless to say, that strategy is not sustainable.
Because the Internet provides a good shopping experience, the brick-andmortar shops are seeing falling sales.
Because the brick-and-mortar shops are seeing falling sales, they chase
away potential customers out of fear they will buy the products online.
Because they chase away potential customers, they diminish the shopping
experience.

