156

7

CHAPTER 8

FUTURES

In the development of design concepts and action scenarios based on these
frames, we hope to find ways to combine several of these frames, integrating the needs of the widest possible group of people into a coherent solution.
Space does not permit us to examine all of the scenarios that were developed
in the course of the marathon project, but let’s take the second frame, that of
the “themed marathon,” as an example. In pursuing this frame, the designers quickly discovered a hitherto hidden potential. They found that he marathon runners are mostly highly educated people, often on the technical side
of the higher education spectrum, and that they come from all over Holland
and Belgium (with a small number of people from other countries). In a region
with high-tech companies that continuously need employees who fit this profile, this finding is significant. Having these marathon runners come to the city,
many bringing along their families, thus creates a great opportunity to show off
the region of East Brabant as a good place to live. The city could be very precise in orchestrating this appeal: by entering the runners’ data in Google Street
View, one could see the kinds of houses where these people live now, and then
use the information to organize events along the marathon route that would
expose visitors to the possibility of a lifestyle in the Eindhoven region that
they will be most likely to enjoy. International recruitment could be galvanized
by extending publicity for the Eindhoven marathon into Germany and other
neighboring countries. It could be an attractive business proposition for the
local companies to become involved in the marathon, adopt a theme along part
of the marathon route, and properly show what the city has to offer. Including
businesses would, in turn, involve more of the Eindhoven population in the
marathon day. … This is just one path of inquiry; there are many more. Please
note that even in all the far-flung directions that the four frames might lead
us, there is a bottom line: the original problem of the traffic complaints. All
solutions will have to address that point—either by reducing the alienation of
the population, by dispersing the marathon crowds in time or in space (as with
the themed sections of the city; see figure 8.1), or by creating a more permeable circuit.
8

TRANSFORMATION

The next step is one of (creative) deduction: taking the idea of the themed marathon circuit, we map out the support structures that need to be further developed and implemented, and then outline the changes that would be required

