162

CHAPTER 8

and the players in the “field” on the left side of a large piece of paper—steps (1)
and (2) in figure 8.2. Then each of them should write down what is important
to them: their needs, values, and “currency” on separate sticky notes (step (3)
in figure 8.2). In the next step, these notes with the needs, values, and core
currency concepts are reclustered into coherent groups (4), irrespective of the
stakeholder or party in the field with which they were originally associated.
In the process of labeling these clusters, or giving them a name, the possible
themes emerge (5) that can be the core of nomological networks (6)—these
are clouds of words that relate to the central concept in various ways, and
together through these connections define that central concept; see figure 8.3.
A thoughtful inquiry into these nomological networks then sparks the emergence of new frames (7).
THE STRENGTH OF A THEME
These themes then have to be thought through and analyzed. This step is tricky
because themes are complex constructs that contain psychological, social, and
technical aspects, often in close connection. One way to formulate a strong
sociopsychological theme is to consider the aspects of the human psyche: are
there consistent and strong relationships between the emotional, cognitive,
motivational, physical, social, and contextual dimensions of the theme in this
particular problem situation? For instance, the theme of “identity forming”
that seemed to play such a strong role for some of the groups of youngsters
coming to the Kings Cross area can be understood in this way. The notion of
social rank within a group of young males has all of these psychosocial aspects:
the group is a high-pressure social environment that is tied to the deeply felt
beliefs and values of its members—to what is considered “normal.” It is also
a highly emotional sphere, where the need to belong and the need to be seen
as an individual with qualities of your own could easily clash with feelings of
anger and frustration. The young men’s personal goals in life are being shaped
socially at a moment when the body is also going through great and unsettling

Figure 8.2

The frame creation workshop: a step-by-step approach to get from context to frames.

