THE ART OF FRAME INNOVATION

173

CASE 1
The high-speed train revisited:
All’s well that ends well

We will now return to the high-speed train link and draw lessons from this classic drama, reporting a fascinating twist at the end of the project.
At the very last planning stage of the project, when the basic decision on
the trajectory had been taken and approved in Parliament, scope remained for
some changes to be made. The precise position of the tracks could still be tinkered with, a freedom of about 100 to 150 meters on either side. And every
segment of the planned railway had been allotted a certain budget for ameliorating the impact of embedding the embankment in the landscape. Consultants
were hired to lead discussions within the affected communities to determine
how that money would best be spent. One of those consultants was dealing
with a rural area, and was faced with the challenge of leading a workshop of
about twenty very disgruntled farmers and their families. Picture a slightly
nervous consultant in a local community hall, standing next to a whiteboard.
In an attempt to clear the air and get a balanced view of the issues, he started
by asking the group what was good about the high-speed train. A deep and
long silence ensued, which was finally broken by the unwilling suggestion that
it was probably good for the economy, and angry shouts about cutting travel
time for those city people if they want to go to Paris. The next question after
this slow start was, of course, what is bad about the high-speed train? This
unleashed a barrage of comments that were duly written down. Then a map
was brought out, showing the broad zone in which the train tracks had to be
positioned. Gradually, the consultant mapped out the consequences of putting
the tracks here or there. Crucially, the discussion veered away from its concentration on the problem of the train (see chapter 1) to a much broader discussion on the quality of life of people along the tracks. This is the conversation
that should have been had fifteen years earlier, if only the process had been
framed right: while a person’s quality of life will be negatively impacted by the
train, this can be compensated in other ways. For this agricultural community,
working intensely with the land, the values that underpin their quality of life
included a fundamental sense of ownership of the land that had sometimes
been in their families for several generations. It was on the levels of practical
problems and this shared outlook that fruitful discussions could be held. The

