THE PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES OF FRAME CREATION

119

alone, is linked to a special sensitivity and quality of perception. She created
a moving series of photos taken at such moments. (4) In a fourth intervention, the artist sits down to draw flowers with people. The drawing of flowers is
an accessible, expressive activity that enables open conversation. Engagement
with the idea of the flower is quite existential, as flowers are both an exuberant expression of life force and an expression of the temporary nature of life as
they wilt and decay. Sitting side by side while drawing flowers allows the safe,
indirect expression of the emotions that arise in the course of a deeply human
conversation.
After the theme of loneliness was thus explored, the artists and designers
came together and made a “nomological network” (see figure 8.3) to capture
their experiences. This provided a rich overview of the real complex concept of
loneliness, as a human and lived experience that comes in many guises. In the
course of the investigation, the concept of loneliness gradually lost its purely
negative connotation. In fact, the ability to “use and enjoy solitude” is one
the eight factors that the U.K. charity the Mental Health Foundation lists as
characterizing good mental health. Within Eastern spiritual traditions, this is
called “aloneness,” and the ability to be alone and in harmony is seen as a great
achievement.
6

FRAMES

The subtle reflection of the artists’ interventions has changed the direction of
the project completely, away from seeing loneliness as a problem that should
somehow be “solved” through an intervention. One of the most fruitful frames
of those adopted for the second half of the project was that of “aloneness,” or to
put it in a more activist language: to be “for loneliness.” This leads to thinking
about loneliness in terms of the inner strength of people, and to thinking about
possible ways in which people can gather and muster that strength.
7

FUTURES

This frame was applied to the plight of one of the groups known to suffer because of the loneliness of the position they find themselves in: people
who are acting as caregivers for a sick family member. Frames were created to
address the needs of people in different stages of the caregiving process (each
coming with their own type of isolation and loneliness), focusing on subtle
issues like the possibility for self-expression (the expression of identity that
may be crushed through the pressure of constant care), the possible feelings

