THE THREE CHALLENGES OF FRAME INNOVATION

135

type of solution begins to surface in the next step, when frames are proposed
as paths to a solution. That is also when the disciplinary approaches become
relevant again. Some of the people and parties involved in a frame creation
process may have a hard time grasping this approach. They will have a strong,
inadvertent tendency to revert back to disciplinary thinking, and jump to conclusions. As we will see in the next chapter, this can derail a frame creation
process, and lead to less than interesting results. All stakeholders and participants in a frame creation project will inevitably come to the process with their
own approaches and built-in solutions, and they need to be coerced out of that
comfort zone toward a new openness. Managing the frame creation process in
such a way that it remains “profession-neutral” requires great skill on the part
of the project leader.

THINKING DIFFERENTLY

Frame creation is not just seeing things differently; it is also a different way
of thinking. There is a logic behind frame creation, but it is a different kind of
logic than the one that people and organizations are used to. Understanding
the underlying logic of the frame creation approach starts with understanding
the central notion of “a frame.” We have seen that frames have a dual nature:
they include both an approach to the problem situation and the proposing of a
solution direction. It is precisely through this duality that frames can act as a
bridge between the world of values and needs, and the world of real action. To
take case study 8 as an example: the Designing Out Crime team looked at the
Kings Cross entertainment area in Sydney as if it was not a crime problem but
an entertainment problem (thus proposing a new approach), and the central
frame of the music festival then indicated many avenues for creating solutions.
If this is a music festival, then people should be able to come and go; if this is
a music festival, then people should be able to be entertained away from the
main attractions; if this is a music festival, then people should be provided with
information to help them find their preferred entertainment option; and so on.
The dual nature of frames informs the logic and structure of the frame creation
process model: the main emphasis in the process shifts from “approaching the
problem” (steps 1–4) to the critical investigation of possible solution directions (in steps 6, 7, and 8).

