16

CHAPTER 1

In a worst-case scenario, the organization might be holding on to its conventional practices for dear life, often not even knowing why. This grasping is
accompanied by a degree of defeatism or melancholia, a nostalgia for the times
when the world was still understandable, a golden age that is now long gone.
This pattern of behavior, effectively the locking down of a problem situation, leads to a deeply engrained inability of organizations to step beyond the
boundaries of their earlier ways of thinking. Creativity consultants then provide workshops to help people “think outside the box”—which may help a little,
but organizations often do not realize what a real change in their own practice
will mean, and do not realize that the boxes they are trying to escape from are
completely self-made. Later in this book we will see how design practitioners
manage to escape creating these thought traps for themselves. The “self-made
box” is an important syndrome because in a truly bound situation, even very
mild and reasonable people can be strangely persistent, relentlessly pushing
a certain problem-solving approach for lack of alternatives. They are blocking
new thinking and reinforcing the patterns of the “self-made box.”
“TAKING THE RATIONAL HIGH GROUND”
Deep down, all organizations that display clear signs of these first three syndromes are convinced that their way of dealing with the problem situation is
completely rational, and that they couldn’t have done anything else. This belief
in their own rationality, and the deeply rooted conviction that there is only one
rational position, can make organizations strangely inflexible in their problem-solving approach. This inflexibility persists even to the point of inducing a
curious repetitiveness, where we see an organization using the same disastrous
approach over and over again. The same government that planned the highspeed train link also constructed a major freight line running right through
the country a couple of years later. That project displayed exactly the same
dysfunctional pattern as the one before (de Vries and Bordewijk 2009). The
strong pattern that emerges here goes beyond clinging to cherished assumptions or preconceptions: at its core is the conviction that the organization’s
problem-solving actions are completely rational and deeply self-evident. This
is reminiscent of the way generals in the First World War kept ordering waves
of attacks on the enemy trenches—only to have their troops mowed down time
and again. Even when this sometimes happened several times a day, they persisted because they just had no other strategy to break the stalemate. Thus

