90

CHAPTER 4

In this case, the field actually yields a second, much larger question that should
probably be taken up in the development project, as it will have an overriding
influence on the design of the stores: the repositioning of the shopping experience in the face of increasing Internet sales.
Because the Internet provides a good shopping experience, the brick-andmortar shops are seeing falling sales.
Because the brick-and-mortar shops are seeing falling sales, they need to
understand the shopping experience.
This is not a paradox (yet), but an open question.
5

THEMES

The themes that can be identified in the field fall into two broad categories:
those concentrating on the socially sensitive choice of an article of clothing in
a private but isolated environment, and the theme of value creation in the live
shopping experience.
6

FRAMES

The combination of these two paradoxes leads us to frame the problem as finding ways to support the social aspects of the choosing of clothing, and to bring
this social aspect into the fitting room environment. This approach directly
addresses the online sales problem: generally, the social sensitivity about
shopping for clothes is well served by the Internet, which offers the possibility
of sharing images and discussing items with friends before buying them. The
main frame that the designers have worked on is one that will transfer this
newfound strength of the Internet back to the store environment. This would
mean turning the stores inside-out, as it were, to create an environment in
which trying on clothes is the central (and unique and live) element that the
store can offer. As a result, the proposal is not to hide the fitting room, but to
make it central to the shopping experience and connect it to the broader social
network of the shopper.
If the problem situation of the department store’s declining sales is approached as if it is a problem of creating a more fulfilling social shopping
experience, then the fitting rooms should be … a catwalk.

