THE FRAME CREATION MODEL

9

97

INTEGRATION

Looking at the city through the filters of dealing with risk, responsibilities, and
emotional distance is a fruitful exercise. Once these themes are articulated
clearly, we immediately begin to see how the current fabric of the city supports
or exacerbates issues in these areas—and immediately ideas spring to mind
about how things could be done differently. On a completely different level,
through this project the city might pick up valuable knowledge on teenagers’
identity formation—an understanding that will come in handy when issues
arise or a crisis occurs.

FIRST REMARKS

Five reflections follow on the nature of these case studies before we consider
the frame creation model more deeply in the coming chapters.
First of all, we should pause to realize that while the design-based frame
creation process may look self-evident when you read it here, it is quite revolutionary. It does not resemble a conventional, goal-directed problem-solving
process at all—nor does it look like the innovation processes that have been
proposed in organizational theory or innovation management. The key differences will be explored in chapters 5 and 6, respectively.
Second, we should realize that the results of these case studies do not
resemble the kind of results that would have been achieved through conventional problem-solving. In conventional problem-solving, the Sydney Opera
House podium would have ended up with a rather well-designed barrier to
keep people out. The department store would probably have had a new system
of tags and safety gates installed at the fitting rooms that would be harder for
thieves to get around. And the City of Eindhoven would probably have launched
another publicity campaign to point out the safety features of Stratums Eind.
In fact, all of these solutions may still be part of the strategies that are sparked
by the novel frames. But the reframing of the issues has both given a much better understanding of the real problem and pointed to a much broader repertoire
of solution directions.
Third, the cases above are in fact snapshots of a crucial workshop that is
part of a much longer process. As we will see in chapter 5 and more extensively
in chapter 8, there is a process of project initiation and research that leads up

