146

CHAPTER 7

completion, while withstanding all attacks from within the innovation-adverse
organization. Sometimes the sidestepping also has a physical nature, as when
organizations create “skunk works”: offsite innovation initiatives where the
normal rules of the organization do not apply.
OPEN, COMPLEX, DYNAMIC, AND NETWORKED PROBLEMS
The open, complex, dynamic, and networked problems and the organizational
syndromes that they highlight have been addressed by innovation management literature in various ways, as exemplified by the models and methods
of multidisciplinary innovation and open innovation. With the introduction of
the frame creation approach, this book has offered an alternative way of dealing with these problems, through the adoption of a set of strong and coherent
design practices. Frame creation imports a set of sophisticated practices from a
discipline that has been versed in the creation of new solutions. In comparison,
some innovation management methods seem to be reactive to the syndromes
in the life of our organizations, compensating (and often overcompensating)
for a perceived problem: for example, they propose that companies are too
closed in their outlook, and need to think about “open innovation” (which runs
the risk of opening the doors much too widely, leading straight to chaos).
THE CONTEXT
For dealing with the dynamic nature of the context, innovation management
proposes sophisticated methods for tracking and analyzing change (market
research, trend watching, forecasting, scenario methods, etc.). One of the key
features of frame creation is that it seeks to look beyond the restless changes
of the day and base its new approaches on the universality and stability of the
themes. Both are needed, in the end: this is surely a point where innovation
management and frame innovation can complement each other.
DEFINITION OF SUCCESS
The definition of success in innovation management tends to be taken from
the general management literature, where short-term pressures (return on
investment, or ROI, and shareholder value) often prevail. Frame creation is
quite radical in that it takes a long-term perspective. Although that could be
perceived as a weakness of the frame creation approach in this fast-moving and
restless world, it may actually be a much closer reflection of good management
practice in the real world. In a delightful study, Hart (1996) has shown that the

