x

SERIES FOREWORD

experience and development are still necessary, they are no longer sufficient.
Most of today’s design challenges require analytic and synthetic planning skills
that cannot be developed through practice alone.
Professional design practice today involves advanced knowledge. This
knowledge is not solely a higher level of professional practice; it is also a qualitatively different form of professional practice that emerges in response to the
demands of the information society and the knowledge economy to which it
gives rise.
In a recent essay, Donald Norman (2010) challenges the premises and practices of the design profession. In the past, designers operated on the belief that
talent and a willingness to jump into problems with both feet gave them an
edge in solving problems. Norman writes:
In the early days of industrial design, the work was primarily focused upon physical products. Today, however, designers work on organizational structure and social problems,
on interaction, service, and experience design. Many problems involve complex social
and political issues. As a result, designers have become applied behavioral scientists,
but they are woefully undereducated for the task. Designers often fail to understand the
complexity of the issues and the depth of knowledge already known. They claim that
fresh eyes can produce novel solutions, but then they wonder why these solutions are
seldom implemented, or if implemented, why they fail. Fresh eyes can indeed produce
insightful results, but the eyes must also be educated and knowledgeable. Designers often lack the requisite understanding. Design schools do not train students about these
complex issues, about the interlocking complexities of human and social behavior, about
the behavioral sciences, technology, and business. There is little or no training in science, the scientific method, and experimental design.

This is not industrial design in the sense of designing products, but industry-related design, design as thought and action for solving problems and
imagining new futures. This new MIT Press series of books emphasizes strategic design to create value through innovative products and services, and it
emphasizes design as service through rigorous creativity, critical inquiry, and
an ethics of respectful design. This rests on a sense of understanding, empathy,
and appreciation for people, for nature, and for the world we shape through
design. Our goal as editors is to develop a series of vital conversations that help
designers and researchers to serve business, industry, and the public sector for
positive social and economic outcomes.
We will present books that bring a new sense of inquiry to design, helping to shape a more reflective and stable design discipline able to support a
stronger profession grounded in empirical research, generative concepts, and

