126

CHAPTER 6

themes, and the ability to create frames that spring from these themes can
become a very flexible basis for its identity.

TOWARD FRAME INNOVATION

Companies and government bodies alike are confronted by open, complex,
dynamic, and networked problems—but they often do not realize it. Such problems initially do not look very different from any other issue that might come
up. But when an organization finds itself confronted with an endless parade of
similar incidents, alarm bells should be ringing that something more fundamental has shifted and its current frames are not good enough anymore.
For example, the police are under pressure because as soon as they intervene in a public space (e.g., ending a brawl), there will be at least ten people
with their smartphones out, filming the scene—the police are then operating
in the middle of an open, complex, dynamic, and networked problem situation.
The open and networked nature of the problem situation means that there is
no margin for error, and they will be held to account if the situation gets out of
hand. The police know only too well that they are living in the spotlight now;
if something goes wrong, the video clips will be all over the Web, sparking the
inevitable outcry in the media. As a response, the knee-jerk reaction from the
authorities is to create more rules that will prevent this particular type of unfortunate incident from happening again. The result is that the sheer number of
rules of engagement that a police officer must adhere to is way beyond what is
practical, and far beyond what a police officer can keep in mind—let alone act
upon quickly in a crisis situation. But the police know for sure that disgruntled
people will use these rules to hound them, after the fact. So creating all these
rules is not only nonsensical (we can never foresee and prevent every detail
of every problematic situation that might occur), it is also actively harmful:
police officers should have the freedom to improvise, based on a keen understanding of their role and the outcomes they should achieve. This illustrates
the interesting phenomenon that while the world is becoming more dynamic,
the direct reaction of most organizations is to seize up and become more static
in an effort to control the situation. A vicious circle begins, leading to autism
and a reinforced addiction to solving problems by relying on rules. This development takes an organization away from the original core problem (the fact
that the world is becoming more open, complex, dynamic, and networked) in

