THE FRAME CREATION MODEL

7

91

FUTURES

As a preliminary physical design proposal, one could think of taking the idea of
a catwalk to the middle of the store, with built-in cameras that allow the customer to post pictures online. The pictures could be put on social media where
friends could vote on which of the alternatives should be bought. This concept
can be extended in myriad ways—for example, a loyalty card could be swiped to
gain access to the fitting room (thus making the fitting room less anonymous,
but no less private), and the fact that you have identified yourself could be used
to show whether the item you are considering would fit with the colors of the
clothes you have bought on earlier visits to the store.
8

TRANSFORMATION

These ideas are not small or easy: implementation of such a reframed store
concept would mean a complete rethinking of the logistics and supply chain of
the company. Giving more space to the fitting room and communication would
result in a reduction of the rack space, so the department store would have to
reconsider displaying all clothes in all sizes on the racks (as they currently do).
Stores would thus have to either reduce the clothing collection being offered or
devise a new system. For example, customers might fit one item for size, then
select the color and order the clothes through the store—either to be picked
up later by the customer or delivered to the customer’s home by the store. Yet
these transformations are possible, and the pressure on the retail sector to
reinvent itself in the face of growing online competition is strong enough to
move it in this direction.
9

INTEGRATION

This frame sets the department store on the road to a whole new concept of
quality in the retail experience—in a way, it is moving away from considering each client individually toward a more social concept of desirability and
satisfaction. To get this right, the company will have to invest extensively in
interaction with the particular groups it is targeting in order to build up valuable knowledge that can be extended into other fields. And finally, a sanity
check: did the DOC designers, by radically broadening the problem field and
taking on the extra agenda, actually help solve the original problem? The solutions as they have been developed to date certainly contribute to a less theftprone environment: by taking the fitting room out of its hidden position, and

