152

CHAPTER 8

marathon that is held in the city every autumn. After an extensive period of
dialogue with stakeholders and other parties in the field, a two-hour frame creation workshop was held with the participation of the content specialist and
seven designers.
1

ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE PROBLEM SITUATION

The Eindhoven marathon has been held since the early 1950s. It is popular with
runners, and is known internationally as one of the faster circuits in the world.
On marathon day, the main 42-kilometer full marathon run is accompanied by
a half-marathon, a 10-kilometer run, and a kid’s run—which all take place on
parts of the same route. But the marathon is not very popular with Eindhoven
residents. The marathon day is marked by many road closures, traffic diversions, and management of the very dense crowds. The local population tends
to flee the city for that day. Those who stay feel frustrated, and tempers flare.
Many people complain, and irate articles appear in the local press attacking the
organization for the perceived mismanagement of the marathon. The city has
already worked on improving communication about road closures and traffic
diversions (using a website, ads in the newspapers, and a hotline), and more
police have been applied to control the situation at specific problem sites. Still,
dense crowds gather, mainly at the start and finish in the inner city, and getting
around the city is hard on that day (especially if you have to cross the route).
The traffic situation is perceived as chaotic and unclear. The City of Eindhoven
has approached the Designing Out Crime initiative with this issue, which they
define as a traffic control problem.
2

ESTABLISHING THE CORE PARADOX

After some discussion, the design team decided it had to step back from the
traffic problem, as the city had already taken many reasonable measures to
resolve it. What makes this problem situation difficult to tackle is the fact that
the traffic problem might be a symptom of the way the marathon is managed
and perceived.
Because the city of Eindhoven wants to be known in a positive light, it organizes a marathon.
Because of the marathon, streets need to be closed off.
Because streets are closed off, the inhabitants of Eindhoven tend to flee
the city.

