THE THREE CHALLENGES OF FRAME INNOVATION

147

prevalent measure of “success” that is used in marketing to select “best practices” to study and emulate does not correspond with what managers in the
field consider “successful” projects. The marketing measure of success is based
on financial criteria like return on investment, while the managers were much
more interested in projects that maybe had not been so profitable but had provided a learning experience on which future financial success could be built.
They were not very interested in the high-yielding “cash cow” projects that the
management scientists had considered to be best practices and encouraged us
to emulate.
RISK
Innovation management doesn’t shy away from the risk that is part and parcel
of innovation, and celebrates the abilities and personal attributes of innovation leaders who take risks. Perhaps the high mortality rate among innovative
projects gives rise to a culture of admiring these “project champions” and celebrating the innovator who perseveres against all odds—and other such highly
charged battle metaphors. In contrast, frame creation is decidedly undramatic:
the risk that is inherent in the creation of newness is reduced enormously by
the careful analysis and the creative exploration that make up the frame creation process. Yet most of the cases described in this book have been seen as
both radical and successful projects by the partner organizations. On reflection,
one could posit that the restless jumping toward ideas that is seen as inevitable in most innovation management literature is what introduces risk into
the innovation process—a risk that is then accepted as part of the heroics of
innovation leadership. It is worth considering whether some of this risk may
be self-inflicted and unnecessary. If I owned shares in a company, I would be
more comfortable with a firm that uses the frame creation approach to achieving radical innovation than with a firm that exposes itself to unnecessary risks.
INNOVATION LEADERSHIP
This raises interesting questions on the “culture” of the fields of innovation
management and frame creation. We know that professional cultures are
closely related to the way we solve problems in our social group (“community of practice”). Whereas innovation management, which has its roots in
U.S. business schools, stresses radical innovation, risk, and leadership, (often
expressed in terms of military metaphors), frame creation is more deliberate, a
trait that might betray its origin in mainland Europe. The depth of the frame

