THE ART OF FRAME INNOVATION

153

The semiparadox arises from this chain of reasoning: the first and third statement are not very well aligned.
3

THE CONTEXT

Next, the problem context is mapped, involving all stakeholders close to the
problem situation. What are the goals and needs of this inner circle of stakeholders? What are their practices and what is their “currency”? First of all, the
city of Eindhoven wants to be known as a serious cultural and social center,
where things are happening. The marathon is seen as a good way to gain exposure, to put Eindhoven on the map. Simultaneously, the city council needs to
convince the taxpayers of Eindhoven that their local taxes are well spent on
something that is actually benefiting the city. Another key player is the city of
Eindhoven itself, as a physical reality. Although it is the hub of a major hightech industrial region, Eindhoven is a relatively small city to organize a marathon in. A large part of the route runs through suburbs that do not attract
the marathon crowds. The international athletics body has a major regulatory
influence on the circuit: start and finish have to be at the same location, and
there are rules on gradients in the circuit, etc., to make the runners’ times count
in the world ranking. The foundation that organizes the Eindhoven marathon
is very much aware of these rules, and has over the years developed a very fast
circuit. The police want to have a safe and smooth-running event without incidents, with minimal police involvement. Local businesses in the center look
forward to a busy day, with cafés and restaurants in the city center being the
main beneficiaries.
4

THE FIELD

Outside the current problem context but within the broader problem arena, the
participants of the frame creation workshop studied the people of Eindhoven,
parents, children, schools, health insurance companies, shopkeepers in the
suburbs, local citizens organizations, the bus company, the state railways, the
organizers of other sporting events, the organizers of cultural events in the city,
the University of Technology, companies large and small that have research
labs in the Eindhoven region, the runners (choosing which marathon to run in
the fall season), the runners’ supporters, the ambulance services, the hospital,
sponsors of the marathon, sponsors of individual runners, the suburbs themselves that might benefit from good media coverage, nature reserves outside
the city, the region of East Brabant in which Eindhoven lies, etc.

