164

CHAPTER 8

physical and biological changes. External factors that are part of an evening in
Kings Cross can easily trigger aggressive or overly boisterous behavior, actions
that are not actually caused by these externalities but by the way this theme
plays out in such a group of young men. Likewise, in the marathon example, the
themes of appropriateness (fitting the city) and inclusiveness (involving the
city) strengthen each other in an interesting manner, and together frame possible actions by highlighting both the major high-tech companies and citizens as
the key players in any solution. The sociotechnical theme of friction highlights
a key variable and points in a completely different set of solution directions.
THEMES TO FRAMES
In chapter 5 we saw that to get from this understanding of a theme to the creation of possible frames (often considered one of the hardest steps in the frame
creation process), one could use the tool of a nomological network, which
effectively creates an in-between step. In making a nomological network, we
put the central concept of the theme (in this case: “forming identity”) in the
middle and surround it with concepts that have been shown in earlier research
to have a relationship with it (see figure 8.3). (The concept of a nomological
network has, in fact, been used before in this book: figure 7.3 and its accompanying text form a nomological network that explicates aspects of novelty and
its relationship to organizational practices.)
Next we strategically choose some of the terms that are close to the theme,
and map the patterns of action that are associated with these terms. In this
case, “strategically” means that we choose terms that are relevant, but in a
nonobvious, slightly oblique manner—this is crucial in order to arrive at a new
approach to the original problem situation (choosing too close to the theme
probably means falling back into existing solutions). For instance, in the case of
our group of young men at Kings Cross, one could look at the social position of
the weaker/junior members in the group, as they are in danger of overcompensating their status by extreme behavior. As a pattern of behavior that might be
useful in this regard, one could look at the way tribal societies ritualize, rather
than regulate or suppress, these internal group conflicts. One could propose
framing the situation in Kings Cross as one of ritualized conflict, and perhaps
think as a solution direction of providing a wide variety of urban games or
sports so that various members of the group can display their own particular
physical or mental skill to the others and be recognized for it, thus releasing
the social pressures on the weaker group members to assert themselves. Young

