24

CHAPTER 2

companies. The company supplied temporary staff to client companies, but
they were having trouble cementing their relationship with the temporary
staff—a relationship that is absolutely crucial for such a service. Initially, the
problem was framed as the need to design a promotional gift to help develop
a better association and greater loyalty. Two artists, working together in the
collective Orgacom (see orgacom.nl) were commissioned to come up with proposals. They quickly got to the heart of the matter: the employment services
company did have a huge problem, and it was not one that could be solved
by simply designing a giftwrapped pen-in-a-box. The whole culture of the
employment services company was based around the need to attract client
companies, and it was going out of its way to be taken seriously by them. It
had adopted a very professional-looking corporate style: an abstract modernist logo, standoffish gray office spaces, and staff that was trained to efficiently
handle all the forms and complexities of temporary staffing contracts. But in
the economic climate of the time, there were more than enough client companies that needed temporary staff—what the employment services company
actually needed to attract was young people to be that temporary staff. All the
elaborate corporate fanfare that they had adopted was completely counterproductive in this regard. Instead of selecting people who come in begging for
work, the company had to become more attractive and inviting to these workers in the range of eighteen to twenty-five years old. The artists came up with
radical proposals to change the company’s practices in this direction. These
inspirations included temporary offices at festivals and other places where
young people gather, staff retraining modules that included some hilariously
confrontational role play, as well as a complete overhaul of procedures to make
the company much more people-friendly. Nine simple line drawings expressed
how the company could place itself differently in the world, outlining nine
completely different kinds of “offices”: a “home office,” a “theater office,” a
“soap,” a “club,” a “bus stop,” etc. (see figure 2.1). Rather than using elaborate
designs, the artists designed brain teasers to trigger the discussions that would
build a context for real change. The same message was driven home on a direct
human level by the role-playing games. The project was presented in a video,
showing clips of the discussions it sparked at the firm. The Young Designers
subsequently presented this to the board of the company. They had effectively
developed the problem in a direction where it could be solved in many new and
interesting ways (Pappers et al. 1999).

