26

CHAPTER 2

been reversed: the new conventional wisdom is to encourage mentally handicapped persons to live their life as “normally” as possible. This includes rehousing them to live independently in towns and cities, with some support from a
network of caregivers. This new ideology has had huge and largely disastrous
consequences for the mentally handicapped themselves. When they entered the
world of “normal people,” their physical isolation was ended, but not their mental isolation. Just moving mentally handicapped people from an institution into
an apartment does not assure their inclusion in society; they tend not to integrate into their neighborhood and really don’t know how to deal with city life.
Their new neighbors generally ignore the mentally handicapped: in the frantic
rhythm of their busy lives, they do not have the time or patience to deal with
them. As a result, the mentally handicapped are stranded in their apartments and
are desperately lonely. The Integrated Living project was commissioned because
the issues facing these people are complex and require creative solutions that
potentially involve many stakeholders, spread throughout our modern urban
society. A space for change needs to be created. In the course of early discussions,
the initial question posed by the ministry was drastically redefined. The ministry
had inadvertently cast the problem in terms of the need to care for the mentally
disabled, while the artists and designers immediately approached the mentally
handicapped in terms of their abilities. This was a first breakthrough, because
thinking in terms of abilities opens up the whole problem arena to consider how
these mentally handicapped people can actually contribute to urban society (the
following quotations, from members of the partner organizations, are taken from
Suyling, Krabbendam, and Dorst 2005). First, from a Ministry employee:
The designers were right not to accept the fact that mentally handicapped people
live outside society. They understand that the mentally handicapped have their own
ambitions.

The question to be answered then transforms from one about care into the
challenge of looking into different ways in which the contributions of the mentally handicapped can be given shape and facilitated. That investigation took
many, very different forms. Said an employee of a partner organization:
Some mentally handicapped people are at home a lot, so they can make a positive
contribution to the social surveillance in the community. The safety and security in
the community also increases through the presence of nurses and [caregivers].

Some of the young designers engaged deeply and personally in the life of the
handicapped people to deepen their empathy and get a feel for where solutions
might lie. One designer commented:

