38

CHAPTER 2

The Young Designers foundation is a platform for experimentation with new
design practices, and as an experimental platform, it has gone through many
radical changes itself, too. What have remained constant over the years are
the emphasis on working with young designers and young artists, the drive
to really push the envelope of what design can contribute to the world, and
a strong educational agenda inspiring young designers to extend their abilities and the scope of their work through participation in these special projects. After all, these projects are a far cry from “normal” design practice, where
one generally starts with a question and designs a solution. In contrast, the
YD/ projects start with the signaling of an issue in society and seek interest
from a group of initial stakeholders to partner in an open process (a “quest,” a
true exploration) around this issue, shaping the questions that should really be
asked. Within this quest, creative freedom is combined with the need for subtle
analysis and a keen sense of the relevance of the chosen path. This balance
between radical openness and goal-directedness is safeguarded by a dialogical approach, where designers and partner organizations come together regularly in meetings to question the assumptions and challenge the conventional
ways of working. The openness that is needed for radical exploration requires
all participants to step out of their usual roles and defined authority. This is
often challenging for the people from the partner organizations, as they are
pushed beyond their normal professional role and possibly their comfort zone.
But it is equally hard for the young artists and designers, who have to focus
their analytical and creative abilities on the development of questions rather
than solutions. These complex processes are guided by the YD/ staff, acting
as a “producer” of the conceptual journey. With minimal interventions, they
ensure the quest reaches a depth where new approaches to issues can be found.
This is the art of the YD/ practice (see chapter 8). Experience has shown that
once core questions can be articulated, possible solutions generally arise very
quickly—and these are sure to be nonstandard outcomes, far beyond the reach
of where conventional problem-solving would have led. Despite their openness
and the radical creativity involved, these projects are not vague, irrational, or
random. Rather, their originality arises from careful, in-depth exploration. The
YD/ organization has learned that to be successful, it is crucial to make sure
that the people from the partner organizations are intrinsically and personally motivated; only a strong internal drive will sustain their involvement in
these complex, multistakeholder quests, in which the nature of the outcome

