SERIES FOREWORD

xi

the solid theory that gives rise to what W. Edwards Deming (1993) described as
profound knowledge. For Deming, a physicist, engineer, and designer, profound
knowledge comprised systems thinking and the understanding of processes
embedded in systems, an understanding of variation and the tools we need
to understand variation, a theory of knowledge, and a foundation in human
psychology. This is the beginning of “deep design”—the union of deep practice
with robust intellectual inquiry.
A series on design thinking and theory faces the same challenges that we
face as a profession. On one level, design is a general human process that we
use to understand and to shape our world. Nevertheless, we cannot address
this process or the world in its general, abstract form. Rather, we meet the challenges of design in specific challenges, addressing problems or ideas in a situated context. The challenges we face as designers today are as diverse as the
problems clients bring us. We are involved in design for economic anchors, economic continuity, and economic growth. We design for urban needs and rural
needs, for social development and creative communities. We are involved with
environmental sustainability and economic policy, agriculture, competitive
crafts for export, and competitive products and brands for microenterprises.
We develop new products for bottom-of-pyramid markets and redevelop old
products for mature or wealthy markets. Within the framework of design, we
are also challenged to design for extreme situations, for biotech, nanotech, and
new materials, and to design for social business, as well as to meet conceptual
challenges for worlds that do not yet exist, such as the world beyond the Kurzweil singularity—and for new visions of the world that does exist.
The Design Thinking, Design Theory series from the MIT Press will explore
these issues and more—meeting them, examining them, and helping designers
to address them.
Join us in this journey.
Ken Friedman and Erik Stolterman
Editors, Design Thinking, Design Theory Series

