134

CHAPTER 7

notion of “rationality”), and “doing” (the world has set ways of dealing with
novelty and innovation). Frame creation is seeing, thinking, and doing things
differently from before—let’s now reflect on these differences and map the
challenges that lie ahead when we set out on the path of implementing the
frame creation approach and internalizing it—as frame innovation—into the
ways of working of an organization.

SEEING DIFFERENTLY

Frame creation entails a shift in perception, seeing the problem situation differently than before. This is problematic because the problem-solving capacity
in our society is implicitly organized by type of solution, rather than by type
of problem. The professions we are in, and the roles we define in organizations,
are defined by a discourse and a worldview that inadvertently push us in the
direction of predetermined solutions. When you hold a hammer, everything
looks like a nail, as the saying goes. So, confronted with a complex and messy
problem situation, we all see it from different angles depending on where we
come from. We have seen time and again in the case studies throughout this
book that complex problems can be described in many different ways, and each
description implies a solution. For instance, of course the police would see the
problems in the Kings Cross entertainment district as a crime issue; of course
the City of Sydney would see the same Kings Cross situation as a problem of
public space design, and so on. And these could all be valid analyses of aspects
of the problem. But these perspectives all come with their own solutions, and
taken separately they may hold only part of the key to success. For this reason,
these organizations should sit down together and work in multidisciplinary
teams: by putting many different (professional) worldviews together, they may
hope to create solutions in which all their insights and qualities are combined.
By contrast, frame creation is not focused on combining the solution directions in this way; instead, it steps back from the simplifications that come from
these professional perspectives in order to delve deeply into the complexity of
the problem field and create themes that are “neutral,” in the sense that they
don’t presuppose a discipline to solve the issue. In the first five phases of the
frame creation model, frame creation is staunchly problem-focused, and steers
away from making any assumptions on the nature or type of solution. The

