viii

SERIES FOREWORD

or map, as well as “to draw plans for; to create, fashion, execute, or construct
according to plan.”
Half a century later, the word began to be used as a noun, with the first cited
use of the noun “design” occurring in 1588. Merriam-Webster’s defines the noun
as “a particular purpose held in view by an individual or group; deliberate, purposive planning; a mental project or scheme in which means to an end are laid
down.” Here, too, purpose and planning toward desired outcomes are central.
Among these are “a preliminary sketch or outline showing the main features
of something to be executed; an underlying scheme that governs functioning,
developing or unfolding; a plan or protocol for carrying out or accomplishing
something; the arrangement of elements or details in a product or work of art.”
Today, we design large, complex process, systems, and services, and we design
organizations and structures to produce them. Design has changed considerably since our remote ancestors made the first stone tools.
At a highly abstract level, Herbert Simon’s definition covers nearly all imaginable instances of design. To design, Simon writes, is to “[devise] courses of
action aimed at changing existing situations into preferred ones” (The Sciences
of the Artificial, 2nd ed., 1982, p. 129). Design, properly defined, is the entire
process across the full range of domains required for any given outcome.
But the design process is always more than a general, abstract way of working. Design takes concrete form in the work of the service professions that meet
human needs, a broad range of making and planning disciplines. These include
industrial design, graphic design, textile design, furniture design, information design, process design, product design, interaction design, transportation
design, educational design, systems design, urban design, design leadership,
and design management, as well as architecture, engineering, information
technology, and computer science.
These fields focus on different subjects and objects. They have distinct traditions, methods, and vocabularies, used and put into practice by distinct and
often dissimilar professional groups. Although the traditions dividing these
groups are distinct, common boundaries sometimes form a border. Where this
happens, they serve as meeting points where common concerns build bridges.
Today, ten challenges uniting the design professions form such a set of common concerns.
Three performance challenges, four substantive challenges, and three contextual challenges bind the design disciplines and professions together as a
common field. The performance challenges arise because all design professions

