154

CHAPTER 8

The participants of the workshop discussed all of these groups thoroughly,
in a discussion that gradually focused on (1) companies—they have a double
interest in promoting a healthy lifestyle and attracting new staff who might
consider Eindhoven as a good place to work; (2) the runners’ families: they
want to see their runner, and support him or her at a spot where it matters.
5

THEMES

For the city of Eindhoven, the marathon helps to fulfill an intense need for
recognition, as it feels itself to be in competition with other cities. As an old
industrial city, Eindhoven has not generally been perceived as a vibrant and
interesting place to live. But this sense of competition that is so keenly felt
by the city council is not shared by the general population, who really value
this lively city for what it has, and do not mind that it is a well-kept secret.
This is where the friction comes from—the traffic complaints, though grounded
in reality, are a symptom of a broader pattern of public disengagement from
the marathon. Meanwhile in the broader arena, there is a rich palate of crossparty themes that could help bring the marathon event closer to the needs of
the city, merging with existing city concerns of workforce needs, inclusion of
an increasingly varied population mix, relating the suburb and the city center,
etc. The central theme that emerged from our discussions is that the marathon
should be an appropriate fit for Eindhoven, showing the strengths and character of the city—but this can be achieved only through the inclusion of many
more parties in the organization of the marathon day.
6

FRAMES

This theme sets us on a road from the current state of affairs (in which there
is a marathon in Eindhoven) to creating a new event that truly and uniquely
is “the marathon of Eindhoven”—an event that could not take place anywhere
else because of the way it reflects and celebrates the character of this city. This
means looking at opportunities to foster a sense of pride in what the city has
to offer. Shifting the focus away from complaints leads us toward the creation
of several frames. One approach to address this problematic situation is to give
the marathon of Eindhoven to the people—to see the marathon as a self-propelled party (learning from the queen’s birthday celebrations), with neighborhoods encouraged to organize events on that day. This process should occur
from the bottom up, with local community organizations bidding for the honor
to host part of the course.

