48

CHAPTER 3

and tend to claim authority by presenting their work as purely deductive (Kuhn
1962; Latour 1987). But it really isn’t, and it fundamentally can’t be.
Deduction and induction are the two forms of reasoning that we have at our
disposal to predict and explain real-world phenomena, and they have driven
our understanding of the world immensely. But deduction and induction are
not enough if we want to make something. If we want to create valuable new
“things,” as in design and the other productive professions, the basic pattern
of reasoning is called “abduction.” In abduction, we set out to create a new
“what”—a new “element” for the problem situation—so that the interactions in
the system lead to a desired outcome. Abduction comes in two forms. In both
forms, we already know at the beginning of the process something about the
outcome of the equation; that is, we have an idea about the value we aim to
achieve with the creation of the outcome.
Normal abduction—solid problem-solving, based on experience

???

+

HOW

leads to

OUTCOME

In normal abduction, we know the result, the value we want to achieve through
the desired outcome, and also the “how,” a pattern of relationships that will
help achieve the value we seek. The missing element is a “what” (an object, a
service, a system), which still needs to be created. For example, faced with an
undesirable situation of late-night violence in Kings Cross, we can choose to
work within the established pattern of relationships for crime reduction, and
send more police into the area in the early hours of the morning. Or we could—
still within the same pattern—set up a training program for security personnel
in which they learn to spot possible offenders more quickly. This is often what
we do, create a solution within a fixed pattern of relationships. In this type of
abduction, the degree of innovation will be limited because the problem-solving process doesn’t question the “how,” and therefore excludes the creation of

