10

CHAPTER 1

assumptions that some factor or stakeholder can be excluded may come back to
haunt you later on in the problem-solving process. Problem and context seem
to merge.
“COMPLEX”
A complex problem is one that consists of many elements, with numerous connections between them. These connections may themselves be interdependent,
creating a system where one small local decision can lead to lots of repercussions and chain effects in other seemingly unrelated areas. These interrelationships make it very hard to split up the overall problem situation into smaller
chunks that could be dealt with more easily (as one does in conventional problem-solving): one can never be sure that in doing so you are not severing key
relations. If key relations are accidentally severed, they will need to be reestablished later in the problem-solving process, when they will present themselves
as flaws in the solution or, indeed, as fresh problems. Furthermore, the very
number of elements and relationships also makes it well-nigh impossible to
abstract from a complex problem (which would be the alternative strategy to
cutting up the problem). The tangle of elements and connections means that
these problems basically have to be approached as a whole, in all their complexity. But how can you do so? We will see that this is an area where expert
designers have some interesting strategies.
“DYNAMIC”
A dynamic problem situation changes over time, with the addition of new
elements and the shifting of connections (e.g., through the shifting of priorities). These can be slow changes, driven by ponderous processes like cultural
change, or lightning-quick movements driven by technological development,
for instance. Some of these dynamic changes we can predict by realizing that
irresolvable issues tend to generate an oscillation, the type of dynamism that
is a swinging movement—especially when the feedback mechanism is slow. For
example, we often see this in the management of large organizations, which
tend to be forever in flux between centralization and decentralization. Both
of these modalities have their pros and cons, and management tends to keep
compensating for these by “reorganizing.” The pendulum between centralized
and decentralized management swings back and forth. One could plan for that.
The wildly dynamic problem situations, of which we will encounter several in
this book, are much more problematic. But as we will learn from expert designers, one can prepare for these challenges, too.

