PIONEERS

29

CASE 7
Street fashion and identity:
On growing up in public

More recently, the Young Designers foundation’s practice has evolved from
a project-based approach to creating environments for innovation. Projects
such as the ones described above are a powerful inspiration and stimulus, but
they need a structural follow-up when it comes to really shifting people’s
minds and working practices. They require a real context for transformation.
One party that quickly embraced this new way of working was a social housing association in Amsterdam that owns large sections of the western part of
the city, mainly middle-sized apartment buildings from the 1960s and 1970s.
The population has changed from the original Dutch inhabitants to a diverse
multicultural mix of families. There are reasons to worry about the future
prospects for the large youth population, for many of these young people are
comparatively undereducated and not well prepared to climb the first rungs on
the social ladder. The street culture in the area is quite negative and at times
destructive (literally, but also metaphorically), with small outbursts of unspoken frustration. Teenagers seeking to form their own identity within such an
environment could easily slip into a downward spiral. This much we know—but
what can we do? In collaboration with a local vocational training college, the
Young Designers foundation set up a fashion studio in which forty teenagers
spent a semester (after school hours) creating their own clothing collections,
with the support of ten fashion designers. Some of the mothers happened to be
excellent seamstresses, and were hired to form a production studio to make the
garments. The kids were put firmly in control; the fashion designers were there
only to support them through the process. This was quite an intense adventure
for everyone, a positive and empowering experience in a neighborhood where
those are not easy to find. All the hard work was rewarded with an inspired collection (under the name We Are Here) which eventually was proudly presented
at a big fashion show before hundreds of guests (figure 2.3). More importantly,
many of the youths had achieved a creative confidence and developed a real
sense of responsibility through the project. All kinds of talents emerged—some
were born project leaders. This fashion studio concept has been run several
times now, and it has been successfully transported to other cities. Initiatives
like this have the potential to turn a neighborhood around, by helping a new

