7

THE THREE CHALLENGES OF FRAME INNOVATION

I hope to have convinced you that frame creation is a much-needed extension
of the repertoire of problem-solving approaches available to us, as it creates a
whole new way to address problems and capture opportunities. But despite its
obvious qualities, the adoption of frame creation, and its embedding in organizations as a frame innovation practice, is not always easy—the very features
that make frame creation such a valuable new practice also make it hard to get
individuals and organizations to adopt it. Frame innovation is at right angles
to current problem-solving and innovation practices: it entails a huge and fundamental shift in how people and organizations see a problem, how they think
about it, and what they do to address it.
This rift between frame creation and current practices leads to many practical problems in the adoption of frame creation and the establishment of
a frame innovation practice; these will be addressed in some final words of
advice in the next chapter. Solutions to many of these issues have already been
built into the frame creation approach itself, based on the rich experience gathered through more than ten years of experimental projects. But it would be
wrong to assume that the barriers to frame creation are nothing more than
practical implementation problems. They are the result of much more fundamental differences that will never disappear. These fundamental issues need
to be acknowledged and understood well—at least understanding the misunderstandings that can occur is a first step toward finding a way to deal with
them. How does frame creation differ from conventional approaches? At the
core of the frame creation approach are three ways in which a frame creation
practice moves away from what people are used to and expect, and thus three
ways in which frame creation clashes with current practice. These challenges
are located in the realms of “seeing” (our perception of the world is organized
by solutions, rather than problems), “thinking” (the world is used to a static

