158

CHAPTER 8

While the frame creation methodology creates new space for initiatives, it
invariably challenges those involved to transform their practices to become
frame innovators.
9

INTEGRATION

However, once these practices are transformed, they can lead to interesting
new explorations. A newfound skill, knowledge, quality, and network may lend
itself to applications in domains that would be unthinkable before the frame
creation project. Also, the deeper theme-level insight that is gleaned in the
frame creation process can stimulate new debates and opportunities. In this
case, the city council could reflect on questions like, “Who do we want to compare ourselves with? How do we encourage others to make that comparison?”
And city officials can use their newly developed brokering practices and networks to address other issues in the city.
This case study shows how a problem situation exploded from a very modest
brief (a traffic problem) into an event that potentially transforms a whole city
for a day. If all goes well in a frame creation process, reaching a new frame like
this (one that fits the old problem situation like a glove, yet transforms it completely) can be the ultimate “Aha” experience. A strong frame doesn’t need to
be sold to the stakeholders: a new, all-encompassing interpretation of reality
has emerged that is completely convincing by itself and “of course” the solutions associated should be implemented as soon as possible. The emergence of
such a strong frame can make the whole frame creation process look like a film
of a building demolition, but an explosion played backward: from a very messy
cloud of dust arises a building where all the pieces fit together in a self-evident
way. But that is the ideal case.
Over the years, we have also experienced the ways frame creation projects
can falter and deliver less-than-brilliant outcomes. One such project concerned the redevelopment of a very complex public space in a city center. The
problem was presented as one of urban planning, and thus was immediately
framed as a spatial issue—bypassing the themes step almost completely, and
leading straight into the generation of spatial solutions. Because the underlying themes were implicit, they were not strategically chosen to steer away
from the current frames of the key stakeholders, and in the course of the ensuing process the solutions gradually gravitated toward fairly conventional outcomes. This situation was exacerbated by the fact that the partner organization

