THE ART OF FRAME INNOVATION

155

If the marathon is approached as if it is a neighborhood event, then …
Alternatively, the city of Eindhoven could provide the frame by dividing the
marathon circuit into themed zones (“health,” “design,” “high-tech”) in appropriate areas along the route—thus effectively seeing the marathon as a showcase for the city. Special events such as factory visits would draw the crowds
away from exclusive concentration in the city center.
If the marathon is approached as if it is a showcase for the city, then …
A third frame would be to make the marathon day less complex and intense by
not combining all the runs, but instead holding the 10-kilometer and the kid’s
run over several weekends. Drawing out the events would add more of a sense
of anticipation to the big race, and the marathon would be seen as one element
of an initiative in health and well-being (the “Human Power Festival”) in one
of the top sporting regions in the country.
If the marathon is approached as if it is the culmination a “healthy city” season, then …
On a completely different level, high-tech solutions could be developed to
make the marathon route more permeable—e.g., sensors and lights alerting
spectators of advancing runners. Mobile technologies could show onlookers
the current position of “their” runner on the circuit, how he or she is doing relative to others, etc. Sophisticated high-tech solutions could be the hallmark of
the Eindhoven marathon experience, an appropriate angle for what was named
the top “smart region” in the world in 2011. This frame casts the marathon
challenge as one of creating transparency and limiting the amount of friction
within the city.
If the transparency of the marathon circuit is approached as if it is a problem
of (social and physical) friction in public space … , then …
Please note that all of these framing metaphors are clear in themselves, but
that the “patterns of relationships” that they suggest differ, that possible partner organizations in the solution space appear in various roles, and that the
overall value created through these frames is not quite the same either.

