THE PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES OF FRAME CREATION

10

109

FOLLOW THROUGH

Frame creation doesn’t end here: after the focused high-energy exchanges of
the frame creation workshop, there is still much work to do. Experience has
shown that it takes a couple of months to rework the session more thoroughly.
One should check any assumptions that may have entered the discussion, dig
into literature to achieve depth and thoughtfulness in the themes, sharpen the
frames, make a much more exhaustive exploration of possible solutions and
map these against the original problem, etc. The result of this follow-through is
a report for the problem owner and key stakeholders, which is much more extensive and penetrating than the knowledge, insights, and ideas that are generated
at the frame creation workshop session. After this report has been handed over,
a lengthy phase of consultation often follows. As we have seen in chapter 3,
accepting frames and adopting them as active principles to guide your actions
is hard. After the adoption of one or more frames, the path to action can still be
hard and long. New frames invariably disturb organizational cultures, processes,
and structures that have been set up to support the conventional problem-solving approach of an organization. Moreover, in a networked world, these frames
invariably cut through organizational boundaries in unexpected ways. It is crucial to support the problem owner in the hard task of following through on the
path to action toward real-world, on-the-ground results.

FRAME CREATION PRACTICES

Until now, the frame creation process has been introduced in the context of
a particular kind of problem. These problems are “old” in the sense that the
problem owner and other key stakeholders have already done what they could
over time to improve the problem situation. In these kind of situations, the
archaeology step will dig up many earlier scenarios in which the problem owner
and other stakeholders have already shown their hand. This step provides us
with an intimate picture of existing frames and practices, as well as rendering a detailed view of what does not work in this problem situation. But, as
discussed in the introduction to the chapter, we can encounter situations in
which the problem is much more open than that, not so much a problem as
an opportunity that could be addressed through frame creation. Or, alternatively, we can find ourselves confronted with a problem situation that is much
more restricted, and provides no immediate way forward—where even an open

