THE ART OF FRAME INNOVATION

169

This offers up an interesting perspective on organizations, in addition to the
perspectives presented in chapter 6: a view of an organization as a set of overlapping and interacting frame innovators who jump into action when there is
a problem (or opportunity), a perceived responsibility, and a possible “path to
action” on the horizon. Within frame innovation, these “actors” are not the
set organizational units that solve conventional problems; they are looser alliances that come together when action is needed and achievable.
METHOD CARDS
To support the steps of frame creation, the Designing Out Crime center in Sydney has developed a set of “method cards.” Method cards were first introduced
into the design discourse by the design firm IDEO (2003) as a way to convince
their clients of their research credentials. IDEO created a set of fifty-two cards
with brief descriptions on one side and an illustration on the flip side to explain
the user-centered design methods and tools the firm uses. Having these tools
on cards has proven to be a very useful in-house aid in setting up user-centered
design projects: one can piece together a project from the different cards, even
while in live conversation with a client. Within the firm, the cards ensure that
whatever a designer or design team is doing, they are always “in a method,”
always applying a structured approach to activities that, without this type of
gentle discipline, could descend into a vague and haphazard muddling around.
The cards also emphasize that there are often multiple ways of executing an
activity, and inspire triangulation on crucial parts of the development project.
The IDEO method cards are publicly available, and although there is a temptation to adopt them wholesale and piece together a project by connecting the
cards, one should be aware that they are in themselves an open-ended and
nonsystematic set, based on the practices that were available in the firm at a
moment in time. Also, the very brief descriptions on the cards stand for a lot
of implicit professional knowledge in the organization. The best way to profit
from the concept of method cards is to create your own set. Figure 8.5 offers a
glimpse of some specific method cards supporting frame creation, which have
been developed and used within the Designing Out Crime center.
The great advantage of a self-generated set of method cards is that it is situated (that is, relevant to the organization) and can easily refer back to salient
aspects of common case studies. Each tool or method can be accompanied by
the contact details of the person best suited to support its implementation,
thus engendering both professional help in implementation and a sense of

