THE OPEN, COMPLEX, DYNAMIC, AND NETWORKED ORGANIZATION

125

application of a new approach without having to renew its own discourse. This
avoidance behavior can be incredibly effective: as a practicing designer, I have
sometimes been amazed by how little was learned from what potentially could
have been a groundbreaking project. To avoid being seen as a one-trick pony,
the Designing Out Crime center always seeks to do multiple projects with a
partner organization. These projects, all ostensibly aimed at direct on-theground results, create interesting new experiences that chip away at the partner organization’s “old thinking” and reliance on current practices.
4

FRAME CREATION PROJECTS

This book has shown that a new frame can also be created from scratch, by going
through a frame creation process. When such a process takes place within the
organization itself, the new frame naturally becomes an integral part of that
organization’s discourse. This unconscious acceptance is a real advantage to
placing the frame creation process within the organization as much as possible.
Design research has shown that adopting a frame from outside the organization is tricky: frames cannot easily be transferred, as the frame not only needs
to be communicated but also to be absorbed in a way that is actionable. In
practical terms, this kind of active engagement means that the frame has to
be reinvented by the receiving organization, and appropriated as its own idea.
Compared to the level of “frame adoption,” this is a much deeper process that
directly impacts the practices of the organization, and potentially is an important driver for innovation. For this reason, both Young Designers and Designing Out Crime work in a strongly participatory manner. If an organization can
come on board in the frame creation project as an equal partner and learner,
this can lead to true frame innovation: the adoption of frame creation practices
within the partner organization itself.
5

FRAME CREATION AS A CONTINUOUS PROCESS

The holy grail of frame creation is that the designerly ability to investigate
themes and create new frames becomes embedded in the organization as a core
skill and an almost continuous process. If this crucial step is taken, the organization will be able to better deal with any open, complex challenges it might
face in the future. This frame innovation capacity involves the ongoing activity
of monitoring the field for themes and exploring new themes that emerge, as
well as the initiation of frame creation projects when the need arises. Over time,
repeated frame creation can lead to an organization specializing in certain

