96

CHAPTER 4

suburbs, what makes this a difficult problem is that the parents live in the suburbs because they have chosen a certain lifestyle; they may even have moved
there because it is a safe and healthy environment to bring up a family. When
their children go out into the city, this splendid isolation is broken, the wall
between the city and the suburbs is breached, and big-city problems begin to
enter their homes. Yet now that their kids are growing up, these parents will
have to learn to engage with the city to some degree. The City of Eindhoven
can achieve this engagement by inviting parents to look around the Stratums
Eind area as it is now, and explain all the safety measures that are being taken.
The council should also introduce some solutions that actually reduce risks. For
example, evidence shows that most accidents happen when kids cycle through
a red light, and people on bikes are most vulnerable to other violence when
they have stopped for a traffic light. To avoid these situations and ease the
flow of bike traffic, the traffic lights along the routes from the suburbs to the
city could be programmed in “green waves,” visible through green and red LED
lights on the side of the bike paths. While one is biking in the green zone, all
traffic lights would be green. This measure also has the effect of causing people
to cycle closer together, therefore increasing social safety. The city could also
develop “bike stops” at Stratums Eind where kids who want to ride back to a
specific suburb can gather and set off in groups (among friends, this could be
supported by a smartphone app). The city could also take sophisticated measures to limit alcohol intake by encouraging other activities around Stratums
Eind for which you need to be reasonably sober, such as urban sports. Event
organizers use these clever tricks to manage crowds, and stimulating good
behavior in this way really works.
8

TRANSFORMATION

At the core of these solutions is the need for the City of Eindhoven to influence
the mindset of its citizens, in this case the parents of teenagers. As an organization, it is not used to doing so, except through single-issue publicity campaigns. But the themes of risk, responsibility, and emotional distance require
a much more open strategy of dialogue and engagement. This goal could be
accomplished by using the networks of schools and other organizations in the
suburbs for both youth and parents, rallying them around the themes of risk
and responsibility. Perhaps local media can play a crucial role by engaging the
key stakeholders, who are most difficult to reach … After all, it is only the girls
themselves who can effectively allay the fears of their parents, and the city has
to find subtle ways to support them in doing so.

