178

APPENDIX 1

is thrown away, because that is the main kind of litter … We could design the bins in
such a way that we create a compartment where the newspapers can be put in …
(time: 62 min.) So we … I don’t know how it will find its way in the rest of the litter
processing … But it would be nice if we could keep this paper separate from the rest
of the litter … Because that means that we have a bin that will not pose a number of
problems in maintenance … If I look at the current bin … Then there is stench … And
it’s too small … It being too small is mainly because … because it is full of newspapers
and that kind of stuff … It would be possible … Because the newspapers are 40 percent
if I remember … Yes, 40 percent of the total litter is newspapers … Almost half … It
would be so good to remove that beforehand … It is dry litter … It doesn’t cause any
visible dirt in the bins …
(time: 63 min.) It isn’t wet, or any of that … It would be nice if we could make
a simple compartment on the bin where people can just stick in their newspaper …
You don’t use the bin as much … You need less volume in the bin … What was the
mean filling … 70 to 85 percent … Of which 40 percent [is] newspapers … That is
an option anyhow … To make such a newspaper bin … And it has another advantage … You see that newspapers and magazines are read by several passengers …
So if you don’t put him in the same container with the coffee cups and the
cans … That the newspapers will remain clean … And can be used again …
(time: 64 min.) Now they stay on the table in the morning … To leave them for the
use of the next passenger … I think the newspapers and magazines are also most of
the stray litter … I can’t really tell from this information card …
I think I heard that somewhere … See if I can find it in the interview with Van
Dalen … Then it will probably … Yes, the newspapers also block the emptying help …
They are a nuisance … Lots of stray litter on the luggage racks …
(time: 65 min.) What is on the luggage racks, … As far as I know in trains, … But
now I’m only using my own experience … There are newspapers and magazines on
the racks … I would like to start with the division between newspapers and other litter … I’ll put down that 40 percent of the litter is newspapers … That means that the
other bin can be smaller in size … However wonderful … That is an important thing …
I think it …
(time: 66 min.) It is now at a height that is felt to be uncomfortable by everyone …
So we have to see whether we can find a better position … Positioning … For filling up
and emptying, so to speak … I think we have to try to get the bin as much against the
wall as is possible. The trains are, as some people said … Though not many … Well,
still, 8 percent …
That bump their knees on the bins … That’s a nuisance … If we can avoid that, we
should … So it would be nice to get the bin flatter against the wall … And Mr. Van
Dalen also said … I think this has to do with his remark that he likes the integration
of the bin in the wall so much …
(time: 67 min.) You try to gain as much space as you can in the passenger compartment … So let’s say … Has to stick out as little as possible … Let’s see … Yes, and
then there’s stench … And the filthy lid … That filthy lid is brought up by almost 30

