86

CHAPTER 4

(when protesters tend to climb up, seeking to make the morning headlines)
and to protect the highest of the sails, as this is the prime target. The infrastructure that is needed for the new curated use of the space could double as a
security measure. The interactive floor could register if somebody is loitering
suspiciously, or standing at one of the possible scaling spots for a very long
time—and alert security before a climb is attempted.
8

TRANSFORMATION

While these ideas are attractive, and would certainly work to make the space
more vibrant and create a safer environment through natural surveillance,
their implementation would require a major transformation in the way the key
stakeholders have been dealing with their “House.” None of the present stakeholders on their own has the expertise needed to take on the complex curation
of such a space, for so many different audiences, on an almost twenty-fourhour basis. The challenge for the Opera House organization will be to open up
to the city itself, and allow other parties in Sydney to take turns in curating
events. One could think of the excellent young artists’ associations, a popular
radio station, and the Museum of Contemporary Art, but also schools, youth
organizations, universities, and other museums, as well as individual artists,
designers, and the musicians who perform at the Opera House. The Sydney
Opera House could organize competitions in which parties from Sydney (and
further afield) could bid to host events and exhibitions on the podium. This
idea ties in with the other aims of the Sydney Opera House (which include creating a better link to city, attracting young people, and of course increasing revenue), but on the flip side, it would mean that the organization must relinquish
some control over what exactly happens, and fully welcome these temporary
curators onto their hallowed grounds. As a result, they would have to deal with
the same “care versus control” dilemma as the care institution for the mentally
handicapped in case 6.
9

INTEGRATION

Once this program is under way, the idea of inviting the city to express itself
on the podium opens up a myriad of possibilities. The Opera House podium
could become an international attraction in its own right. On an intellectual
level, this exercise is unique in giving new meaning to a static landmark that
could otherwise become a hollow experience, and yet the concept is applicable
to many public spaces worldwide.

