36

CHAPTER 2

CASE 10
Retail theft made hard:
On crime prevention at its most invisible

Shoplifting is quite a common crime, costing consumers billions of dollars worldwide every year, as retailers have learned to budget in a 10 percent
markup for what they euphemistically call “shrinkage.” Conventional measures to reduce shoplifting include using mirrors and CCTV cameras, installing
warning signs, and hiring additional security staff. Evidently, shop design can
also play a major role in preventing this crime, but this is where retailers and
their designers face a strange paradox: to sell, the goods need to be displayed
in a beautiful and tempting manner and to be easily accessible to prospective
customers. Most retailers will reject any design intervention that they suspect
could lead to a drop in legitimate sales and would rather live with “shrinkage.”
Yet there is a societal cost to shoplifting that has to be taken into account: it
is often an easy “first crime” for young people to attempt. If it isn’t nipped in
the bud, the habit of stealing can easily lead to other, more serious crimes. And
from a moral standpoint, we just cannot let this stealing go unchecked.
DOC researchers and designers were challenged to create solutions that
would not decrease the attractiveness of the merchandise (and, if possible,
would increase it), while preventing it from being stolen. The DOC project
focused on a number of goods that get stolen a lot—the list includes small
expensive items like cosmetics, but also batteries, clothing, and cans of baby
formula. The designers quickly realized that the biggest thefts occurred where
a black-market network existed to sell goods easily and in large quantities.
They decided to concentrate on these situations, and reframed the problem as
one of preventing large quantities of these particular goods from being stolen.
This focus shifts the problem away from complete prevention, which indeed
is very hard to achieve without making life harder for legitimate customers.
Many different solutions were devised for the broad range of products. In the
case of baby formula, for instance, the designers came up with a dispensing
mechanism that only allows you to take out one can at a time—preventing a
thief from sweeping an armful into a bag. The wheels of the dispenser are filled
with sand which makes a gentle but persistent sound, warning shop attendants
to take a look when that sound is heard for a longer period of time. Similarly,
for clothing, a hanger was developed that is clipped to the rail of the clothing

