THE FRAME CREATION MODEL

95

will have to learn to manage the risk in their own lives. Their parents might
be overly worried and protective, or they might be right in judging their kid to
be too naïve to shoulder this responsibility. The parents are in the process of
relinquishing control over their children (the growing distance between parent
and child was one of the themes that Van Manen explicated; see chapter 3).
Going out with friends without adult supervision is often one of the first major
steps in this difficult process. This leaves parents worried, whether or not they
have valid reasons to be anxious. A third theme at play here is that of the distance between the suburbs and the city—creating physical distance as well as
emotional distance.
6

FRAMES

From these themes (dealing with risk, responsibility, and the distance between
suburbs and city), many frames were generated. To name just two:
If the problem situation of the clubbing daughters is approached as if it is
a problem of failing to deal with responsibility, then the City of Eindhoven
could …
If the problem situation of the clubbing daughters is approached as if it is a
problem of (emotional) distance between the suburbs and city, then the City
of Eindhoven could …

7

FUTURES

One of the ideas developed on the basis of the first frame was the need for a key
clip. The designer noticed that the girls going to nightclubs have no pockets
to keep their house keys and the keys for their bike lock. Keys end up being
stashed in bras or other tight-fitting clothing. He designed a clip that can safely
hold the keys and can also send a signal to the parents to let them know that
the keys are in place—thus subtly alerting them when their daughter is on her
bike back home. The most important feature of the key clip is its different communication settings. The girl would discuss with her parents which one to use,
thus demonstrably taking responsibility for her own safety. The introduction of
these could be part of a school program to begin a discussion on the issues of
safety and responsibility.
The second frame, distance, stirs up an equally rich domain of possible solutions. Although there are many ways to overcome the relative isolation of the

