136

CHAPTER 7

The first two steps in the frame creation process, which concentrate on the
problem as presented, are necessary because frames are intrinsic—we cannot
formulate or approach a problem without framing it. We cannot not have a
frame. The implicit framing of the problem situation needs to be investigated;
it is vitally important to understand the frame that led to the occurrence of the
problem situation in the first place. The initial framing could originate in the
history of the problem, it could be a general cultural convention (e.g., the close
link between “care” and “control” in the health system [case 6]), or it could
stem from the interaction between the problem owner and the inner ring of
stakeholders. Beyond that core group is the wider field of parties who have not
participated in the problem situation before but who have a potential influence,
and could develop a direct interest in the problem if it were framed in a different way. In the frame creation approach, the search for new frames is shaped by
the need to shed the preconceptions of existing frames. By moving to the outer
rim of the field and analyzing the shared themes in the broader problem arena,
such new approaches are allowed to emerge. From that moment, the process
flips to concentrating on the second nature of the frame and becomes a critical creative exploration of possibilities—applying creative forward-thinking
to spot possibilities, while exercising a keen critical judgment in the performance of repeated reality checks. We can then reengage with the inner ring of
stakeholders and the problem owner to present them with possible future scenarios that resolve the original problem situation. All elements of the original
problem situation are first questioned and then redefined in the frame creation
process, step by step—as expressed in the nested-circles model (see figure 7.1).
This model defines the inner logic of the frame creation approach, and
should engender trust in the sequence of steps in the frame creation process
model. The frame creation approach is consistent and coherent; it is not a
cheap trick based on some superficial techniques that designers have dreamt
up, but a serious approach to problem-solving that provides an interesting
alternative to conventional problem-solving.
However, to really understand the difference between frame creation
and conventional problem-solving, we need to delve a little deeper into the
assumptions that underlie conventional problem-solving, especially the key
concept of “rationality.” Rationality is considered the bedrock of critical discussion and successful action. This is a cultural “given” that runs very deep
in our veins: we are used to the convention that we must be able to give an
account of our thoughts and actions using rational arguments. We aspire to

