148

CHAPTER 7

creation approach cuts out risk while still achieving radical innovation—but
by eliminating risk, it also rules out the opportunity to be a hero in the classic
sense of the word. Frame creation might be more amenable to, say, the Indian
or Chinese approaches to issues—see appendix 4. These cultural factors might
also explain why, while the model is very widely applicable, frame creation
has found its first experimental platforms in the public sector. Private-sector
companies have been slower in realizing its potential and embracing the possibilities of frame creation. One could speculate that this is because the culture
behind the frame creation approach doesn’t come naturally to them, and they
do not have the processes and structures in their organizations to deal with this
type of innovation. But examples like the department store case study (case 12)
have shown that the depth of the frame creation approach is not wasted on the
commercial sector.
ENTREPRENEURING
A clear contact point between the frame creation approach and the thinking in
the broader field of management and organizational sciences lies in the area
of entrepreneuring. This field has lately become more dynamic in its approach
as it has turned away from studying the personality traits of great entrepreneurs (and glorifying these innovation leaders as “lone warriors”) to concentrate on the study of processes. Hence the word “entrepreneuring,” rather than
“entrepreneurship” (Steyaert 2007). With this shift in focus, the debate has
moved away from discussions of nature versus nurture (can entrepreneurship
be taught, or is it an innate personality trait?) and toward the fruitful bringing together of many theories and viewpoints on the practices of these entrepreneurs. A new richness in the field has resulted. The theory of effectuation
is an attempt to come up with such a central model; it finds its roots in the
same logical schemas that were used in chapter 3 to position design reasoning
relative to the other reasoning modes. In “effectuation,” the central reasoning mode of entrepreneurial thinking is characterized as an “even if …” reasoning pattern that deals first and foremost with issues of possibility and risk
(Sarasvathy 2008). This theoretical basis is now matched to real-world entrepreneurial practices by studying entrepreneurial people. These studies are performed in much the same way that designers have been studied, using protocol
analysis of individuals and groups in laboratory and real-life situations (see
appendix 1 for an example). The patterns of thinking found are interestingly
similar too. As it is, the lessons learned from these rich data sets are restricted

