168

CHAPTER 8

There are several benefits to this way of working: for the university, this is
a good way to integrate research, education, and external engagement, while
the frame creation process is helped enormously by the unbiased observations
of the students. Working with young people who look at the world with fresh
eyes is a crucial feature of both the Designing Out Crime center and the Young
Designers foundation.
Apart from sparking changes in the ways that participating organizations
work, frame creation can also spawn new networks of actors, and create new
roles for organizations within these networks. In the marathon case study, for
example, city officials take on a new role as network actor in the city. And indeed,
in the aftermath of this small project, actor networks have come together and
collaborations have led to first experiments to implement the proposed frames
and solution directions. That this can be taken much further is proved in the
Kings Cross case study (see case 17). The result is a confident new strategy
called “OPEN Sydney—Future Directions for Sydney at Night,” which sets out
how the city seeks to become more “global, connected, diverse, inviting, and
responsive.” By entering into the process in this way, the City of Sydney as
an organization has become an active agent in a completely new way. It has
become a curator or perhaps even conductor of life in the city. It has not just
reframed a problem, but has reinvented itself as a new actor within the city.
EMBRACING FRAME CREATION
Introducing the ability to create frames to an organization widens its repertoire of problem-solving strategies enormously, and deepens its knowledge of
the outside world. When this is done successfully, something deeper and more
lasting can happen. We have not yet focused our attention on the very last step
of the frame creation process, “integration,” but a small revolution can occur in
this step from which a completely new type of organization is born. To understand this transformation, we have to look at organizations in a different way,
beyond the problem-solving perspective we have maintained throughout this
book, to consider frame creation as a structuring principle for organizations in
and of itself.
In today’s culture, networks of individuals form the basis for societal organization, in
contrast to “mass societies” in which the collective organizes the individual. The historical uniqueness of this form can be contested—there have always been networks—but
the scale and size of cooperation have grown enormously. (Van Dijk 1999, as quoted in
Boutellier 2013)

