LESSONS FROM DESIGN

61

to maneuver from a situation where he or she is seen in the role of a “technician” (the client knows exactly what is needed, which the designer then carries
out) to that of a “facilitator” (the client knows what is needed but not what is
required to achieve it) or an “expert” (the client has a partially formed idea, and
the designer must use his or her expertise to negotiate a workable formulation
of the brief). For these graphic designers, the preferred mode of working is that
of “collaborator,” where the client and the designer mutually work on framing
the project in terms of both problem and solution spaces.
From the interview data, we find that designers use abstraction, or an
emphasis on the future context in which the design has to function, to sway
clients from a problem-solving approach to one that allows for the negotiation of new frames (Hekkert and van Dijk 2011). These are effective ways of
steering briefing conversations away from specific outcomes to an exploration
of deeper situational values. Designers use metaphor, contextual engagement,
and conjecture to “destructure” the problem situation along with their clients
to allow reframing to occur. “Mood board” discussions constitute one method
designers use to invoke metaphors and analogies. These mood boards assist
in creating a more open conversation about a project, as they use abstract
images that do not immediately prefigure particular solutions. The interviewed
designers all cited contextual engagement through questioning and exploring
the situation with the client as a key strategy. Reframing is further assisted by
exploring abstracted, conjectured views of the situation. Often, multiple conjectures are posed and are kept intentionally vague in playful conversations:
“talking things through what we might explore.” As the most significant barriers to reframing, designers cite the clients’ fixation on their initial idea for the
project, following a problem-solving mental model of design (where the client
cannot imagine the designer taking a more strategic role), and resistance to
journey (where the client feels the need for a quick solution and believes they
lack the time or resources to open up the problem situation). In the field of
product design, Hekkert and van Dijk (2011) have developed a formal approach
to shift the definition of the problem by highlighting a future context. The first
step of their model involves critically weighing the assumptions that lie behind
the initial brief. To be able to create newness, the designer has to know the
thought process that led to the design of current products and to the current
problem situation. The designer then proceeds by questioning the importance
of those fundamental variables and their current state. The next step is to create an image of the future context as it will develop. Once this has been agreed

