110

CHAPTER 5

problem-solving approach like frame creation has to take a step back and cautiously find a way to develop the problem situation before it can be fruitfully
approached. Apart from these two extreme situations, a frame creation project
can also arise from the inspiration that comes from the deep investigation of a
theme. In this section, we will describe three projects to explore how the frame
creation approach works in each of these cases. These case studies should be
seen as exemplars of the different frame creation practices, from among the
many that are possible.
First, we will describe a case in which a societal need and a new technical
possibility require the creation of new frames. In this situation the frame creation approach can be used, though in a slightly different way: opportunitybased projects start more or less “in midair,” as there is no set paradox or group
of stakeholders. While this saves quite a bit of analysis work in the early stages
of the frame creation process, the issues relating to the dynamics of the problem owner and the problem situation will then have to be assessed later in the
frame creation process (in step 8, “transformation”).

CASE 14
Smart Work Hubs:
On shaping infrastructure for the knowledge economy

All around the world, the nature of work is changing through the influx of new
digital technologies. The coming of the digital age challenges the conventional
view of work as the creation of outcomes in a central “production facility” that
employees travel to. In a society where “knowledge work” is becoming more
important, the nature of what professionals do is changing fundamentally.
Knowledge work involves inspiration and reflection (Leadbeater 2001). These
tend to be highly connected activities that thrive in a rich and lively (networked) environment. While the coming of the broadband network in Australia
has encouraged people in small-town and rural areas to engage in knowledge
work, the nature of these activities requires people to come together in new
networks, which require a novel support infrastructure. The idea of creating
“Smart Work Hubs” at major transport interchanges around major Australian
cities are being piloted as the key physical infrastructure to match the broadband infrastructure. The framing challenge centers on the fact that there is

