128

CHAPTER 6

full-blown crises. That is the more profound promise of becoming a frame
innovator: existing in the world in this way, relating to the world in this way
fosters a less nervous, problem-prone existence. With such fearlessness and
confidence comes the possibility of adopting a truly long-term perspective and
assigning a healthy relativity to short-term issues, incidents, and the crises of
the day. It is this confidence that creates space, allowing the organization to
completely bypass the age-old syndromes discussed in chapter 1 in one fell
swoop. An assured organization will be more open to collaboration, less prone
to oversimplify and overrationalize a problem, more flexible in its problem
approach, quicker to adapt to changing circumstances, and less preoccupied
with conserving a precious identity that is anchored in past performance. The
syndromes are all short-term defensive mechanisms that are, in the end, driven
by fear and a need to cling to a feeling of control in a fluid and changing world.
Many people in organizations will understand this and agree that the frame
creation approach makes absolute sense—but that realization doesn’t make it
easy for them to become frame innovators in their organizations. As a process, skillset, and mentality, frame innovation is completely incompatible with
conventional organizational processes and structures. The Young Designers
foundation and the Designing Out Crime center have to deal with the fact that
their practices don’t integrate easily with the practices of their partner organizations. The old thinking and syndromes that were listed in the first chapter
can be deeply engrained; old habits don’t die easily, even in the face of a better
alternative. While YD/ and DOC like to see themselves as catalysts for radical
innovation, they find themselves to be unwilling revolutionaries, using guerrilla tactics to undermine old structures. Creating an organizational context for
frame innovation is a huge challenge, and the jury is still out on which strategies are successful, under which circumstances. But examples are trickling in.

CASE 17
Reframing the city at night:
On a new understanding of public space

The City of Sydney has been proactively engaged with the follow-up on the
Kings Cross entertainment district project (see case 8). After that experience,

