THE ART OF FRAME INNOVATION

171

Common design and research tools used by designers can be found in Laurel
(2003) and Kumar (2012).
Just as the set of frame creation method cards is open-ended, so is this book,
which needs to start drawing to a close. Frame creation is a complex practice,
and there are a million things still to impart to the reader at this point. These
would include subjects such as the facilitation of the frame creation process, or
the practice of “shadowing” a development project that is happening in a partner organization, using frame creation to show alternative paths and solutions
in a live context. Or we might explore the conundrum of frame innovation and
times of crisis: situations are often ripe for change when there is a crisis; but in
a crisis situation, frame innovation might be perceived as too slow and cumbersome. There are also many things that frame creation still can’t do, but might
be able to once its practices have been developed further. Appendix 3 therefore
briefly outlines a development agenda for frame creation and frame innovation.

PATH TO ACTION

What if many organizations adopted frame innovation as one of their core
practices—what brave new world would that lead to? In sociological terms, the
practice of frame creation would help organizations and people deal with a
society that is less hierarchical and more fluid than ever before. This would
result in a need to improvise; indeed, Boutellier (2013) has coined the phrase
“improvising society” in his book of that name, where he explains:
Society no longer shapes itself around institutions; rather, the institutions must fold
themselves around the events in an impulsive and fragmented society … [society shapes
itself around] a motif or “theme” that resonates and thus creates a sense of community.

But good improvisation (in the jazz sense) should always be based on a clear
sense of direction and flow. These can be provided by the deeper layers of
insight and structure that are built up in a frame creation process. The ubiquitous adoption of frame creation could lead to parties from different walks of life
discovering that they are dealing with the same themes, and are creating frames
that move in a similar direction. This could lead to interesting crossovers,
shared practices, and shared projects and ventures. The rise of these new actors
would be driven by people who have been described as “interpreters” (Verganti

