106

6

CHAPTER 5

DEEPEN THEMES

The creation of themes is the most abstract activity in the frame creation
approach, and the activity that is hardest to grasp by people new to this
approach. Yet it is also the step that more than any other defines the depth and
quality of the end result. Having a profound understanding of the themes will
not only help keep the next steps of the frame creation process on track, it is
also a key benefit of the process in itself—we will see in the next chapters that
a deeply understood theme will stabilize the core philosophy and identity of
an organization, while allowing it great flexibility to cope with the fluidity of
its environment. In this way, frame creation contributes to avoiding the chaos
of knee-jerk reactions and the stuck quality of the “syndromes” that we saw in
chapter 1. But what does this really mean, the “depth” of a theme? As we have
seen in the case studies, themes can emerge from combining the riches gleaned
from the expanded problem situation, even in a brief workshop session. But
those particular themes should be viewed as nothing more than labels to indicate an area of interest that needs to be explored in earnest and at length after
the session. Such a systematic examination can be supported by the extensive
methodology that can be found in hermeneutic phenomenology, by designbased practices, and by the analysis of the “history of ideas” around a theme.
The themes that emerged in the Sydney Opera House case study (case 11) are
deep-seated indeed. They are inherent in people’s need to aspire to a higher
plane of existence (whether through religion, art, or the experience of nature),
lifting us above the cares of our daily lives. There is a deep attraction to places
that are out of the ordinary, that symbolize a higher significance, and where
one can drink in that experience—albeit temporarily. The Sydney Opera House
addresses these themes as a building. Understanding these essential meanings
then informs the decisions that the management of the Sydney Opera House
takes on the development of the site. Merely preserving the shape of the Opera
House as a “museum piece” overlooks its real significance.
7

SHARPEN THE FRAMES

It is important to make the frames as sharp and precise as possible. A frame
is only effective when it evokes a very clear picture in the mind, and when it
does so for all the major stakeholders. Often, honing a frame to convey such a
sharp picture can be achieved by combining themes or by combining several
frame ideas. It often pays in frame creation to overdo this, and oversharpen the
frames: for instance, in the case of the troubled entertainment district (case

