76

CHAPTER 4

Often, several issues are intertwined in a problem situation, but to keep the
frame creation process on track, it is important to take some time to identify
the core paradox or deadlock that keeps the problem owner from moving forward. Within our experimental frame creation projects, it has proven practical
to express the paradox as a clash of rationalities in a series of “because” statements. Please see the case studies below for examples.
CONTEXT
The next step in this analytical phase of the frame creation process completely
surprised me when I first encountered it in the protocol studies of experienced
designers: after all the hard work they do to establish and accurately formulate
the core paradox, they put the paradox statement aside and do not look at it
again until much later in the process. In retrospect, this makes sense: we need
to deliberately turn away from the core paradox if we are to shift the problem
situation. The designers shelve the original problem to begin the next step of
the frame creation process with a sense of freshness and energy. What follows is
an exploration of the practices of the inner circle of key stakeholders who have
been involved in the problem situation before, or those who are clearly going
to be necessary participants in any possible solution. By carefully examining
them, we seek out significant influences on their behavior and what strategies
they currently employ. In this way, we gain a sense of practices and scenarios
that could become part of the solution.
FIELD
Once a reasonably complete overview is achieved (when there is saturation),
we leave the inner circle of stakeholders alone and begin to radically widen the
context, creating an intellectual, cultural, and social space we will here call a
“field” after Bourdieu. Like many key concepts in Bourdieu’s work, the concept
of “field” can be approached from many different angles (Grenfell 2012) and
requires some explanation. After all, we could take “field” as a meadow (not
what we mean here), a “playing field” (close), or a “force field,” as in science
or science fiction (also really close). Bourdieu describes the notion of field as a
space where assets (cultural, economic, social, and symbolic) are the “currency”
that is exchanged between players. We will use the term “field” in this book in
the sense of a very wide social and intellectual space. By creating a field, we
consider all (potential) players, including anyone who might be connected to
the problem or the solution at some point in time—actively or passively, just

