THE FRAME CREATION MODEL

79

we also need to develop a fledgling version of the value proposition for all of
the parties involved. A frame and the solution ideas it generates are only as
good as the interest and commitment they spark in the parties who are needed
to implement them.
TRANSFORMATION
The next step is a critical evaluation of what frames and solution directions
would be feasible in the short term, or can be established gradually over a longer
period of time. Here the representation of ideas becomes important as a means
to explore their merit in conversations with parties in the field. This step is not
meant to be a “hard” review of the idea as such, but rather an exploration to
unearth changes that are needed in the proposed ideas as well as in the practices
of the participating organizations, to make it all come together. At this point we
also grudgingly have to weed out frames and ideas that may be great in themselves, but whose implementation would require huge changes in the practices
of a stakeholder who has very little to gain. These frames need to go because
they will never happen. This step results in a “business plan” accompanied by a
transformation agenda and a strategy for achieving results. Often, because we
are dealing with radically new approaches at this point, the strategy has a shortterm component that will yield quick results (working with the organizations as
they are now) and a long-term component that requires changing the practices
of the various organizations (called “frame innovation”; see chapters 6 and 7).
INTEGRATION
In the last step of the frame creation process, we need to make sure that the
new frames and the developments they initiate are well integrated into the
broader context of the organizations involved (whether they are the original
problem owner or a whole new network of players).The new frames created in
the context of this original problem situation may also hold patterns of relationships that can be applied in other areas of the organization or beyond. New
thinking means that new opportunities and connections will arise. On a deeper
level, what has been learned in the discovery of the underlying themes can now
be integrated into the “discourse” of the organization as active knowledge. This
integration allows organizations to move away from only reacting to problem
situations that the world throws at them, and to become proactive in their relationship to their environment. This is a crucial ability for organizations that
face open, complex, dynamic, and networked problem situations.

