94

CHAPTER 4

coverage makes parents deeply worried about their kids going out. Another
player in the problem situation is the physical layout of Eindhoven. The city
expanded rapidly in the 1950s and 1960s along a road infrastructure that is
built for cars. Young families typically live in suburbs that are quite far removed
from the city center. All of the city’s through-roads are built for speed, with
large sprawling intersections, and there are no houses directly adjacent to
these thoroughfares. Although there is a good system of bike lanes and cycle
paths along these roads, they tend to run quite close to parkland that surrounds
the transport infrastructure.
4

THE FIELD

In the social field, we find the bar and club owners; they want to be seen in a
good light, but do not want their business restricted in a way that reduces turnover. This has been a difficult balancing act as the introduction of sweet highalcohol drinks has made drinking alcohol more attractive to younger kids (the
legal drinking age is eighteen). The public transport organizations (train and
bus companies) see an interesting but problematic market: sudden peak usage
is hard to cater for logistically, and they are wary of the drunkenness and vandalism that can plague these night routes. The taxi companies are probably the
only parties that profit from the status quo—they would like to see any solution
include an increased use of their services. Most important are the teenagers
and their process of growing up. They are exploring their own identities, others, and the world in an exhilarating but also difficult time in their lives. The
key social groups in their lives are, of course, the schools they go to, as well as
sports clubs and other organizations they might attend. The informal organization among teenagers is strong, as is their social sense and peer pressure—they
are in the process of forming their identity by bouncing off those of their peers.
As they become more independent of their parents, they can be fiercely critical
of authority, and easily angered and emotional when approached in a way they
see as patronizing.
5

THEMES

This problem arena is extraordinarily rich in themes. One major theme in the
background is the question of how we deal with risk in society. Living is inevitably perilous, but in a society that emphasizes control, these dangers are not
easily tolerated. People want the state to “eliminate” risk, though in reality risk
can only be diminished. The second theme is responsibility: these teenagers

