THE PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES OF FRAME CREATION

107

8), one could (over) focus on creating a good late-night experience for just one
particular group of youngsters (say, young males going out together—see chapter 8). Such very concrete and limited frames will more easily suggest what
particular actions to take. The ideas that flow from such a focused frame can
invariably be applied much more generally later on in the project.
8

BE PREPARED

What actually makes a “good” problem situation that would benefit from utilizing frame creation rather than using other problem-solving approaches? From
the case studies, we can glean some general patterns: (1) there are opposing
views or conflicting aims, (2) no obvious solution is apparent, (3) the problem
can be placed in an expanded context, (4) there is an open-minded champion
within the “problem owner” organization that is seeking a solution, and (5)
earlier solution attempts have not resulted in a satisfactory resolution, to the
point where there is a willingness to take a different approach. When most or
all of these conditions have been fulfilled, the frame creation approach still
requires a lengthy process of getting to know the problem, approaching actual
and possible stakeholders, motivating them to participate, making contact with
external expertise that may be useful, etc. Initial discussions with the problem
owner usually involve “widening” the brief, often by involving not only the key
decision makers but also the people “on the ground” in the organization who
actually have a more direct and complete overview of the complex problem
situation. This process cannot be rushed: together with the historic research
that is an essential part of the archaeology of the problem situation, this preworkshop phase takes on average two to three months from first contact. These
activities can be seen as a “map-making” of the problem situation, in its current and in its expanded form. Experience has shown that these maps (see figure 5.3) are often a key deliverable of the frame creation approach, as they can
act as mirrors helping organizations to understand why and how they are stuck
in their problem-solving processes.
9

CREATE THE MOMENT

After all this preparatory work, the team can embark upon the frame creation
workshop, which normally lasts two to four hours. In this workshop, all the
information is brought together, and the team is taken through the frame creation steps by a facilitator. The team members of these frame creation sessions
tend to be very diverse. To achieve breadth and depth in the frame creation

