THE PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES OF FRAME CREATION

111

no model for this yet: Smart Work Hubs in other countries tend to be generic
work spaces where you basically rent a desk, rather than bespoke solutions that
deal with the challenge of supporting knowledge work in remote areas. An initial frame creation workshop explored possibilities for creating a special Smart
Work Hub infrastructure. A formidable group of stakeholders from various government departments used the frame creation process to frame the idea of a
Smart Work Hub in a way that is intelligent, original, appropriate for the Australian situation (implementing a combination of government agendas), and
also appropriate for the locations selected for prototyping—in particular, a site
at the edge of Sydney’s western suburbs.
1

ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE PROBLEM SITUATION

Because of the novelty of this challenge, the archaeology step in the frame creation model cannot focus on earlier solution attempts by the problem owner;
instead, it can more neutrally investigate the initial situation of the project.
In this case, the workshop focused on one proposed location, and began by
mapping who currently lives or works there. Out of the very diverse picture,
the image emerged of a suburban community where 70 percent of the workforce (mainly finance/media/communications/transport industries) commutes
1.5 hours into the city. There is also a small trade and manufacturing sector,
aimed at local needs. It is a regional medical hub, and that cluster of activities is growing but lacks a research arm. Special to the situation are the highly
educated people and creatives who travel through from the villages in the Blue
Mountains (which form the western limits to the Sydney metropolitan area). As
a regional center, it has only a small area of businesses and shops. The overall
connectivity is good, by both road and train—which results in the center being
quite empty during the day, when a whole population age bracket leaves for
work and doesn’t return until the evening.
2

ESTABLISHING THE CORE PARADOX

As the Smart Work Hubs are a novel idea rather than an existing problem situation, there is no paradox to investigate. Yet there are forces and developments
to reckon with that could push a solution in opposing directions. These forces
include the casualization of the workforce, the extensive decentralization of
public services, and the delegation of functions from the public sector to the
private sector. The creatives are an interesting group—but they have conflicting requirements depending on their orientation: locally operating firms need

