SERIES FOREWORD

ix

1. act on the physical world,
2. address human needs, and
3. generate the built environment.
In the past, these common attributes were not sufficient to transcend the
boundaries of tradition. Today, objective changes in the larger world give rise
to four substantive challenges that are driving convergence in design practice
and research. These substantive challenges are
1. increasingly ambiguous boundaries between artifacts, structure, and process;
2. increasingly large-scale social, economic, and industrial frames;
3. an increasingly complex environment of needs, requirements, and constraints; and
4. information content that often exceeds the value of the physical substance.
These challenges require new frameworks of theory and research to address
contemporary problem areas while solving specific cases and problems. In professional design practice, we often find that solving design problems requires
interdisciplinary teams with a transdisciplinary focus. Fifty years ago, a sole
practitioner and an assistant or two might have solved most design problems;
today, we need groups of people with skills across several disciplines, and the
additional skills that enable professionals to work with, listen to, and learn
from each other as they solve problems.
Three contextual challenges define the nature of many design problems
today. While many design problems function at a simpler level, these issues
affect many of the major design problems that challenge us, and these challenges also affect simple design problems linked to complex social, mechanical,
or technical systems. These issues are
1. a complex environment in which many projects or products cross the boundaries of several organizations and stakeholder, producer, and user groups;
2. projects or products that must meet the expectations of many organizations,
stakeholders, producers, and users; and
3. demands at every level of production, distribution, reception, and control.
These ten challenges require a qualitatively different approach to professional
design practice than was the case in earlier times. Past environments were simpler, and made simpler demands. Individual experience and personal development were sufficient for depth and substance in professional practice. While

